Future Direction
Socialware is a new concept for network community support [2].
We believe it opens up new areas
of application for a multiagent framework.
These
areas include:
implementing socialware as a multiagent system,
namely how to make a coalition of agents, and how
humans and agents can effectively collaborate as a
system.
c
References
• Modeling the behaviors of communities;
• Structuring communities;
• Enabling flexible communication channels;
• Learning and collaboration of users and agents;
and
• Mediating public information spaces and personal
spaces, including balancing between privacy and
open opportunity.
There are still several technical challenges in
1.
Foner, L.N. A multi-agent referral system for matchmaking.
In Proceedings of PAAM’96 (Apr. 22–24, London).
The Practical Application Company, Lancashire, 1996, 245–261.
2.
Ishida, T. Towards CommunityWare.
In Proceedings of PAAM’97
(Apr. 21–23, London).
The Practical Application Company, Lancashire, 1997, 7–21.
3.
Kautz, H., Selman, B. and Shah, M. Referral Web: Combining
social networks and collaborative filtering.
Commun.
ACM 40, 3
(Mar. 1997), 63–65.
4.
LaLiberte, D. and Woolley, D. Presentation features of text-based
conferencing systems on the WWW.
Computer-Mediated Commun.
4, 5 (May 1997).
5.
Matsubara, S., Ohguro, T. and Hattori, F. CommunityBoard:
Social meeting system able to visualize the structure of discussions.
Simulations in Economics and Management
Alok R. Chaturvedi and
Shailendra R. Mehta
Economics addresses this basic problem: There are n
agents interacting with each other in m markets.
We
want to find out the equilibrium set of actions of each
of the agents in each of the markets as well as the
associated prices and quantities.
As agents and markets increase in number, the computing power
required to solve this problem increases exponentially
in nm, and inversely with the level of precision one
wishes to achieve.
It is clear, as Rust [1] eloquently argues, that for
an even moderately complex economic model, there
is very little hope of actually solving the problem.
This
has, in fact, spawned more and more literature on
impossibility theorems (also surveyed by Rust) pertaining to the computation of economic problems.
One solution to this conundrum is to have agentbased models.
Here, the power and intelligence of
real-life markets is mimicked in the laboratory populated by agents acting in markets exactly as they are
supposed to in real life.
Rather than trying to compute the solution to models, we actually let the market mechanism find one for us.
Again, as Rust points
out, the computing power required now only increases
exponentially in the number of markets, m. This route
provides an acceptable theoretical alternative.
This
is the motivation behind the Synthetic Economy for
Analysis and Simulation (SEAS) project.
SEAS is a distributed, interactive, real-time environment for conducting large-scale experiments and
60
March 1999/Vol.
42, No. 3 COMMUNICATIONS OF THE ACM
simulations in areas where interactions among
agents need to be studied.
SEAS replicates the real
world in most crucial dimensions, such as competition, regulation, decision variables, and interaction
dynamics.
It consists of interlinked goods, stock,
bond, labor, and currency markets, as the Figure in
this sidebar shows.
In these markets, two types of
agents interact: live, that is, people acting as buyers,
sellers, regulators, intermediaries; and virtual, or
artificially intelligent software agents, that mimic
human consumers in a narrow domain.
SEAS is a dynamically reconfigurable environment
structured around the interplay of human decisions
and game events that requires active involvement of
participants.
It helps participants understand the
sources and motivations underlying the decisions by
placing them in the shoes of executives running the
firms in different points in time and challenging them
to do better.
Games dealing with current or future situations help explore the potential implications of
various courses of action and raise important questions for further investigation.
A game design requires four steps: setting the
geography of the game; designing the game board,
pieces and scoring; customizing the database; and
calibrating the artificial agents’ parameters to match
that of the real consumers.
SEAS simulation process
consists of three steps:
• Pre-game briefing.
It provides an industry overview
of the players and their strategic positions and the
rules of engagement.
In Proceedings of Knowledge-based Intelligent Electronic Systems
(KES’98) (Apr. 21–23, Adelaide, Australia).
IEEE, Piscataway, N.J.,
423–428.
6.
Nakanishi, H., Yoshida, C., Nishimura, T. and Ishida., T. FreeWalk: Supporting casual meetings in a network.
In Proceedings of
CSCW’96, (Nov. 16–20, Boston.).
ACM, N.Y., 1996, 308–314.
7.
Nishimura, T., Yamaki, H., Komura, T., Itoh, N., Gotoh, T. and
Ishida, T. Community Viewer: Visualizing community formation
on personal digital assistants.
In Proceedings of IJCAI’97 Workshop
on Social Interaction and Communityware (Aug. 23–29, Nagoya,
Japan).
Morgan-Kaufmann, San Francisco, 1997, 25–30.
8.
Yoshida, S., Kamei, K., Yokoo, M. Ohguro, T., Funakoshi, K. and
Hattori, F. Community visualizing agent.
In Proceedings of
PAAM’98 (Mar. 23–25, London).
The Practical Application Company, Lancashire, 1998, 643–644.
Makoto Yokoo (yokoo@cslab.kecl.ntt.co.jp) is a research scientist
at NTT Communication Science Laboratories, Kyoto, Japan.
Shigeo Matsubara (matsubara@cslab.kecl.ntt.co.jp) is a research
scientist at NTT Communication Science Laboratories, Kyoto, Japan.
Sen Yoshida (yoshia@cslab.kecl.ntt.co.jp) is a researcher at NTT
Communication Science Laboratories, Kyoto, Japan.
Permission to make digital or hard copies of all or part of this work for personal or
classroom use is granted without fee provided that copies are not made or distributed
for profit or commercial advantage and that copies bear this notice and the full citation on the first page.
To copy otherwise, to republish, to post on servers or to redistribute to lists, requires prior specific permission and/or a fee.
Fumio Hattori (hattori@cslab.kecl.ntt.co.jp) is the executive
manager of the Computer Science Laboratory at NTT Communication
Science Laboratories, Kyoto, Japan.
Takeshi Ohguro (ohguro@cslab.kecl.ntt.co.jp) is a research
scientist at NTT Communication Science Laboratories, Kyoto, Japan.
• Game playing.
Here, the participants try out their long-term
strategic and short-term tactical moves, evaluate their performance periodically, and
make adjustments.
• After-action review.
Participants are allowed to develop
strategic insight by reviewing
the performance of each of the
groups, analyzing the moves,
countermoves and their effectiveness, and learning from collective experiences.
© 1999 ACM 0002-0782/99/0300 $5.00
Live Agent
Live Agent
Live Agent
Live Agent
Firms
Live Agent
Several simulations and experiments have been conducted using
SEAS.
For details, see [2].
c
Live Agent
Synthetic
Goods and
Services
Stock
Labor
Bond
Currency
Economy
Virtual Agents
Virtual Agents
Virtual Agents
Virtual Agents
Consumer
References
1.
Rust, J. Dealing with the complexity of economic calculations.
Workshop on Fundamental Limits to Knowledge in Economics.
(Santa
Fe Institute, July 31–Aug. 3, 1996).
2.
Chaturvedi, A. R., and Mehta, S. R. Synthetic Environments for
Analysis and Simulations (SEAS): A Technical Report.
Technical
Paper, Purdue University, Aug. 1998
Alok R. Chaturvedi (alok@mgmt.purdue.edu) is an
associate professor of information systems in the Krannert School of
Management at Purdue University, West Lafayette, Ind.
Shailendra R. Mehta (mehta@mgmt.purdue.edu) is Director,
Entrepreneurship Initiative in the Krannert School of Management
at Purdue University, West Lafayette, Ind.
SEAS consists of a fully functioning synthetic economy
with interlinked goods and services, bond, labor, and currency
markets that closely replicates essential aspects of internal and
external business environments facing a firm.
Teams of human
participants represent the producer side of the economy, while
the demand side can be represented in desired detail by
arbitrarily large numbers of artificial agents.
© 1999 ACM 0002-0782/99/0300 $5.00
COMMUNICATIONS OF THE ACM March 1999/Vol.
42, No. 3
61