The Reward Based Online Shopping
Community
WEI T. YUE AND ALOK CHATURVEDI
The Internet has catalyzed the transformation of traditional business to
online business (business-to-consumer
(B2C)
and
business-to-business
(B2B)).
Consumers are buying more
and more things online: from cosmetics to cars and from home financing to trading stocks.
According to
The Forrester Research and The Boston Consulting Group, web sales to
consumers will surpass $108 billion in
2003, a tripling in value from just
$36.6 billion in 1998 (Standard and
Poor’s Industry Survey – Retailing:
Specialty 2000).
In the early years of
online business, the major objective
of a typical B2C E-commerce firm
was to build up traffic on their website and to acquire a critical mass of
consumers.
Growth, instead of profits, was the main goal of online business.
Over the years, more and more
brand-name stores have started to
build up their online presence.
En
route to this goal, smaller E-tailing
firms or some of the ‘pure clay’ online
firms encounter tremendous competition from established retail stores as
well as from new entrants.
The recent
depression in stock prices of E-tailing
businesses such as eToys and CDNow
indicates that investors expect Etailers to produce sustainable profits.
The major challenge for E-tailers as
well as other B2C online firms is to
survive in an increasingly competitive
and crowded marketplace.
As the industry matures, sustaining a critical
mass of loyal consumers becomes a
priority.
While many online retailers
are considering online marketing strategies such as portal partnership,1 one
new concept being practised now is
the reward based online shopping
community (ReBOSC).
This paper
indicates the operating mechanism as
well as the validity of the ReBOSC as
a business model.
b
s
t
r
a
c
t
Increased competition in Internet commerce is forcing E-tailers to constantly
innovate.
Identifying an audience
through a content-specific website is
one thing, however, it is more challenging to create a network of diverse
online stores from different business
areas and multifarious target audiences.
This article advances the notion of a
new type of community, the Reward
Based Online Shopping Community (ReBOSC), as a potential value-added marketing channel for E-tailers.
Based on
an analytical framework, we show that
the ReBOSC can achieve the above task
by adopting a combination of concepts
– the ‘E-Mall’ and the ‘Loyalty Program’ – and, thus, overcomes the
shortcomings of conventional E-commerce models.
In order to survive in
the mercurial world of Internet commerce, it is crucial to be able to
sustain a minimum critical mass on the
demand side.
The ReBOSC can potentially provide effective solutions for Etailers to increase customer loyalty and
create a combined market power.
REWARD BASED ONLINE SHOPPING
COMMUNITY
A ReBOSC combines the shopping
mall concept with customer loyalty
program concept to form a ‘third
party’ shopping community in which
customers earn rewards for shopping
with the merchants in the community.
Each time a consumer shops at a
particular site accessed through the
ReBOSC, they are awarded credits.
Once they accumulate a minimum
number of credits, they may redeem
them for specific rewards or gifts such
as brand-name products, cash, frequent flyer miles etc. Some sites even
allow rewards to be electronically donated to non-profit charities.
Conventionally, the success of many
businesses requires market presence
and customer retention.
The ReBOSC relies on the network of merchants to build this market presence
A
u
t
h
o
r
s
Wei T. Yue is a Ph.D. student in MIS
at Purdue University.
His research
interests include synthetic agents and
economies and electronic markets.
Alok Chaturvedi is Associate Professor
of MIS at Purdue University.
His
research interests include artificial
intelligence applications, machinelearning, and stereoscopic visualization
of business data.
Copyright & 2000 Electronic Markets
Volume 10 (4): 224–228.
www.electronicmarkets.org
INTRODUCTION
A
Keywords: e-commerce; community; online shopping; loyalty program;
ReBOSC
COMMUNITIES AND PLATFORMS
and a loyalty program to ascertain
customer retention for the merchants.
Currently, numerous websites are operated by the ReBOSC business model (Please refer to Table 1 for a list).
Jones (1997) states that the term
‘virtual community’ can be interpreted
from two perspectives – the ‘virtual
community as a new form of community’ and the ‘virtual community as
group-computer mediated communication.’ Rheingold’s (1993) definition,
which falls into the first category, defines virtual communities as ‘social
aggregations that emerge from the Net
when enough people carry on those
public discussions long enough, with
sufficient human feeling, to form webs
of personal relationships in cyberspace.’ Hagel and Armstrong (1997),
on the other hand, explain the virtual
community as a computer mediated
medium concerned with ‘aggregating
people’ to meet people’s expectations
regarding
‘interest,
relationships,
transaction and fantasy’.
The ReBOSC
is a type of community that fulfils
people’s needs to transact by having a
group of merchants sharing common
interests with a group of consumers.
Schubert and Ginsburg’s (1999) virtual community of transaction appropriately describes the ReBOSC.
She
states that such communities ‘deal with
the exchange of goods and services, or
more specifically the purchase transaction itself’ which ‘can emerge between
business-to-business partners as well as
between companies and private end
consumers.’
THE CONCEPT OF THE E-MAIL
Conducting business in a mall produces a double effect – a ‘competitive
effect’ and a ‘network effect’.
On the
one hand, direct competition and
rivalry with other business gives rise
to the competitive effect.
This may
prove harmful to some businesses as
potential customers can be lured away
by rival stores.
On the other hand,
numerous stores of different business
areas in a mall offer customers access
to shop at many market places at the
same time.
This network effect counters the competitive effect borne out
of rivalry.
Online malls modify the conventional shopping experience in two
important ways.
Distance and time
become insignificant: stores are just a
click away and can be visited twentyfour hours a day.
As a result, the
competitive and the network effect
become even more critical for online
stores.
An online mall, therefore, be-
comes an attractive business model
for e-Commerce – it can generate a
mass of diverse potential customers
for member stores just like in a conventional mall and can provide a timeless and spaceless dimension to
conduct business.
Currently, many of the online websites attract customers by providing a
shared-interest focus: they provide
common interests that appeal to large
target audiences.
For example, iVillage.com attracts women by providing
female-related information like health
and beauty advice.
While content-specific sites can sustain and maintain
customer base by providing information of common interest, the criteria
to sustain and maintain a shopping
mall are more complex.
Customers of
a diverse group of online retailers
have a wide range of interests.
Unlike
traditional malls that rely on proximity of location, restaurants and movie theatres to attract customers,
online shopping malls cannot rely on
environmental and physical characteristics; nor can they rely on contentspecificity to attract a diverse consumer market.
The major challenge for
an online shopping mall is to be able
to create the ‘Mall Effect’ that would
appeal to a widely divergent consumer
base.
Electronic Markets Vol.
10 No 4
Table 1.
Summary of the ReBOSC sites
225
ClickRewards
Earn ClickMilesTM for shopping at merchants in the community.
Transfer ClickMiles TM for Frequent flyer
(www.clickrewards.com)
air miles on 10 major airlines or use ClickMiles TM to redeem other products ranging from palm pilot
to tour package.
More than 70 participating sites, including bn.com, macys.com, E-Trade and The
Gap Online.
Currently it has over four million members.
It is one of the many loyalty networks built
by Netcentives, Inc.
Yahoo!
Shopping
Earn points for shopping at merchants listed in Yahoo!
Shopping, purchase airline tickets through
(shopping.yahoo.com)
Yahoo!, read Yahoo!
delivered messages and use Yahoo!
Visa Card.
Use points to bid prize in Yahoo
auctions or exchange points for gift certificates from participated merchants.
Thousand of
participating merchants.
Spree.com
Earn cash back for purchasing from affiliate merchants.
Redeem cash once $25, ($100 for non-U.S.
resident) are accumulated.
More than 150 participating sites, including Apple.com, JCPenney, bn.com
and Toyrus.com.
Currently it has over two million members.
GreaterGoods
Donate 5 to 15% rebates of every purchasing transaction to preferred non-profit charity institutions.
(www.greatergoods.com)
The participating merchants include Amazon.com, eToys, OfficeMax, Dell and others.
Other similar sites are Dash (www.dash.com), Shop2Give (www.shop2give.com), Ebates (www.ebates.com), LookSmart RewardMall
(www.rewardmall.com), MyPoints (www.mypoints.com).
Consumers
Merchants
Consumers
Purchase in this period
Purchase in last period
Figure 1.
Direct online sales model
Third Party Community Site
THE ESSENCE OF THE ReBOSC
More Merchants, More Customers
Retention
While the online mall and online
loyalty program models both have
their own shortcomings, they do
complement each other well to form
Merchants
Rewards
Consumers
More Customers, More Merchants
Figure 2.
ReBOSC model
locality and other ways to attract
customers, online retailers rely just on
their own networks to generate a
critical mass of customers in order to
sustain their business.
One way to
generate traffic is the associate/affiliate program widely prevalent in the
web today.
Amazon.com pioneered
the Associate Program to build its
online presence on the Internet.
This
program awards webmasters who direct visitors from their sites to Amazon.com and if the latter purchase any
thing from Amazon.com.
By putting
their links and advertisements on
other websites, Amazon.com created
a pool of associates who sell merchandise for them.
The rewards paid by
online merchants like Amazon.com
has brought incentives for third party
sites, portals and Internet marketing
firms to build WebPages that utilize
the collective power of merchants’
loyalty programs and advertisementspending in order to build a large
demand network.
Moreover, acquiring valuable information such as community member demographics and
members’ shopping behaviours is also
an incentive for creating a shopping
network.
The ReBOSC can potentially put
together many specialist (as well as
generalist) sites to form a premier
shopping community – a task that is
not easily accomplished in the physical
world.
While single retailers contemplate on staying alone or merging, the
ReBOSC puts them in a position
where they can both be alone and
merge with other stores.
This can
help smaller sites to compete against
the large brick-n-click retailers that
possess large established market
power.
The ReBOSC also has the potential
to become a ‘trust-ed’ community.
The ReBOSC possesses more information than other ‘trust-ed’ domains
as it can track all the transactions that
occur within it.
While other ‘trust-ed’
domains lack the right to punish
deviants, the ReBOSC has the capability to punish non-compliant members
and
deter
unacceptable
behaviour.
Abusive members can be
disqualified or can have their reputa-
The ReBOSC
The popularity of reward based customer loyalty programs has increased
manifold, ranging from frequent-moviegoer schemes to frequent-flyer programs.
They award credits to
customers, which can be redeemed
for rewards after a certain minimum
number of credits are accumulated.
This scheme promotes the ‘lock-in’
effect because it provides continuous
incentives for customers to return to
the website.
According to Jupiter
Communications, ‘56% of online consumers surveyed reported that they
would be likely to transact online
more often with a given commerce
player if loyalty points were offered’
(Swerdlow et al. 1999).
Traditionally, a loyalty program system is hampered by the lack of a
robust information system to track
customer information.
In more ways
than not, the Internet has provided a
unique facilitatory environment to set
up a customer behaviour tracking
system (by analysing patterns in surfing behaviour, purchase preferences
etc).
Another hurdle faced by retailers
is the validity of the loyalty program.
Due to economies of scale and the
very nature of the business, it is
economically feasible for airline companies to incorporate such a loyalty
system in their business model.
Small
retailers may not have sufficient margin from sales to support the same.
For example, if an online shoe store
has to sell ten pairs of shoes in order
to reward a pair of free shoes, the
value of the program immediately
diminishes for customers as it would
take years for a person to buy that
many pairs of shoes.
The resulting
loyalty cost for customers does not
justify them to participate in such a
scheme.
an attractive combined business model for retailers.
They can solve the
‘two-sided critical mass problem’
(Kollmann 1998): the need for a
critical mass of suppliers and for a
critical mass of demanders.
In a traditional direct sales model, given the
competitors in the market place, customer loyalty is not guaranteed (Figure 1).
This is because consumers can
easily switch to different merchants
provided price and service variations
are minimal.
The loyalty program is a
crucial component in binding together a reliable customer base.
It
generates a shopping community,
which brings together a network of
merchants and consumers to conduct
transactions.
The common interest of
receiving awards attracts customers to
return to the shopping community.
In addition, merchant network reinforces the value of the community by
the broad variety of products offered;
in turn, allowing customers to have
more purchasing options and an easier
way to accumulate credits.
As time
progresses, more merchants would
find it worth their while to join the
network of increasing market power
while more consumers would be attracted to it owing to greater convenience of shopping and reward
options.
A growing network on both
the supply and the demand sides in
turn boosts the reputation of the
shopping community (Figure 2).
The validity of a ReBOSC stems
from the nature and structure of
‘cyberworld’.
Unlike the physical real
world, where retailers can rely on
The Reward Based Online Shopping Community
CUSTOMER LOYALTY PROGRAM
CONCEPT
226
Electronic Markets Vol.
10 No 4
227
tion overtly slandered in the community.
In essence, the ReBOSC also fulfils
the four important roles of market
intermediaries that Bailey and Bakos
(1997) adjudicate, namely, (a) aggregation of buyers and seller products,
(b) institution of ‘trust’, (c) reduction
of operating cost and (d) matching
buyers and sellers.
The ReBOSC concept, though promising, faces numerous potential pitfalls.
One of them is the ability to
sustain traffic in the community.
Even
though the ReBOSC may attract customers in the short run, the challenge
is to preserve the online brand name
for the long run even after other
similar communities are formed.
As
for merchants, they would be inclined
to join all the ReBOSCs because the
action is similar to putting banners on
other websites.
Hence, they may not
necessarily show loyalty to one community.
The consumers, on the other
hand, would be inclined to move
from one ReBOSC to another, as
rewards become more liquid and frequent.
This, in turn, defeats the primary goal of customer retention that
the ReBOSC pursues.
In addition, it
has been tough to establish a prominent online presence since the Internet has created an environment of
information deluge, which successively diminishes the marginal value of
value-addition to a commercial website.
According to the GartnerGroup,
the cost of building an outstanding
website becomes more expensive as
the marketplace becomes competitive.
They predict that ‘the costs should
increase by twenty-five percents annually during the next two years’
(Standard and Poor’s Industry Survey
– Retailing: General 2000).
IMPORTANT FACTORS OF THE
ReBOSC
The business model of the ReBOSC
necessitates successful maintenance of
a critical mass of merchants and consumers.
One may deduce some salient
features of a successful ReBOSC:
· community brand name – product
evaluations, price comparisons,
message boards, product-search features, charity donations and other
value-added services can boost the
value of the community;
· constant innovations – re-engineering business models to sustain competitive
advantage
of
the
community;
· ‘liquid’ rewards through increased
frequency of payments – customers
have higher incentive and lower
loyalty cost in joining the community;
· high quality of merchants – guarantee satisfaction of the customers;
· diversity of merchant network –
customers have multiple product
markets to choose from.
Customers
enjoy ‘one-stop’ shopping and an
easier way to accumulate credits;
· complete and robust reward-tracking system – pleasant experience
for shoppers and good marketing
data for merchants;
· study of customer data – utilize
valuable consumer profiles and
transaction information to serve
customers better;
· co-ordinated and coherent promotional or marketing schemes –
stores can jointly profit from
economic bundling.
For example,
promoting complementary products
like wedding products and wedding
services;
· merchant and consumer size – prevents over-dependence on a few
merchants and consumers;2
· fair and coherent merchant community guidelines – a reliable and just
system to avoid potential conflict of
interests and to lessen discord within the community.
tion with rival competitors from
around the world.
Eventually, diseconomies of scale come into effect and
limit the number of stores that can
survive.
Currently, ‘as much as 75% of
business-to-consumer e-Commerce is
now done through five sites: Amazon,
eBay, AOL, Yahoo!
and Buy.com’
(The Economist e-Commerce Survey –
Shopping Around the Web 2000).
As
a result, it is important for retailers to
form alliances to create a larger market presence and retain customers in
order to survive in the ‘New Digital
Economy’.
The combined concepts of E-Mall
and loyalty program form the heart of
ReBOSC model.
It has the potential
to agglomerate E-tailers’ market
power as well as increase customer
loyalty.
We have looked at some determining factors of a successful ReBOSC.
Though, this paper covers an
overall discussion on the ReBOSC
model, many issues still remain to be
explored.
For example, the competitive advantage of the ReBOSC model
in the long run, the potential of
ReBOSC being a ‘trust’ domain and
how to build such a ‘trust-ed’ ReBOSC, the quantitative and qualitative effects of the various determinant
factors discussed above have on the
overall customer loyalty.
Further examinations of those issues may shed
more ideas in building more effective
online community.
CONCLUSION
Notes
The Web has enabled firms to instantly put their business on a global
market.
However, E-tailing firms are
bounded by the nature of the Ecommerce market which forces size
limitations on them.
Other than physical supply bottlenecks, 3 the Internet
instantly puts stores in direct competi-
1.
According to Jupiter Communications, ‘online commerce driven directly by the primary portals will
grow only slightly from 18 percent
in 1999 to 20 percent in 2002’
(Swerdlow et al. 1999).
The need
to develop a diversified distribution
strategy is very important.
2.
According to Daintry Duffy
ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS
We are grateful to Kemal Altinkemer,
Jacquelyn Rees, Mukund Sundaram
and Deniz Aksen for suggestions and
ideas of this paper.
Bailey, J. and Bakos, Y.
(1997) ‘An
Exploratory Study of the Emerging
Role of Electronic Intermediaries’,
International Journal of Electronic
Commerce 1(3): 7 –20.
Duffy, D.
(1999) ‘It Takes an EVillage’, The CIO Enterprise
Magazine [http://www.cio.com/
archive/enterprise/
101599_virtent.html] accessed
February 2000.
The Economist (2000) ‘The Economist
Schubert, P. and Ginsburg, M.
(1999)
‘Virtual Communities of
Transaction: The Role of
Personalization in Electronic
Commerce’, Proceedings of the 12th
International Bled Electronic
Commerce Conference, Bled, Slovenia:
646 –63.
Steinfield, C. and Klein, S.
(1999)
‘Local vs. Global Issues in Electronic
Commerce’, Electronic Markets,
9(2): 1–6.
Swerdlow, N. et al.
(1999) ‘Portals:
Limited Commerce Revenue Drives
Diversified Distribution’, Jupiter
Communication (online) [http://
www.jup.com] accessed March
2000.
Standard and Poor’s Industry Survey
(2000) ‘Retailing Specialty’: 3.
Standard and Poor’s Industry Survey
(2000) ‘Retailing: General’: 6.
The ReBOSC
References
E-Commerce Survey – Shopping
Around the Web’, February 26: 27.
Hagel, J. and Armstrong, A.
(1997)
Net Gain: Expanding markets
through virtual communities, Boston,
MA: Harvard Business School Press.
Jones, Q.
(1997) ‘Virtual-Communities,
Virtual Settlements & CyberArchaeology: A Theoretical Outline’,
Journal of Computer-Mediated
Communication 3(3) [http://
www.ascusc.org/jcmc/vol3/issue3/
jones.html] accessed June 2000.
Kollmann, T.
(1998) ‘Marketing for
Electronic Market Places – The
Relevance of Two ‘‘Critical Points of
Success’’ ’, Electronic Markets, 8(3):
36–9.
Rheingold, H.
(1993) The Virtual
Community: Homesteading on the
Electronic Frontier, Reading,
Massachusetts: Addison-Wesley
Publishing Company.
The Reward Based Online Shopping Community
(1999), ‘the success or failure of
an online community (OLC) is
usually determined by only a small
percentage of the site’s audience’.
3.
Steinfield and Klein (1999) studies
present more detailed look into
the issues related to local versus
global focus e-commerce.
228