p=l
where
b,
H3(SI
x,= X S P ) = -
f(S I xz = 2 * P , C J 9 )
q=l
x log,(f(S
r = l q,=l
This formula can be extended to m dimensions quite easily to
compute Hjnlj,- 1,...,j, (SI.
As with the case of single output dimension classification,
the procedures for computing entropies for selection of a
dimension Xi and the stopping rule remains the same, except
that the formula for conditional entropy is now used.
I x,= 2 , p , c J q ) ) i= 1,2, .,n C. Concept-Based Conditional Class$cation(C3) Algorithm
*
f
The algorithm for concept-based conditional classification
(C3) parallels that developed for simple classification as
Selection of a dimension Xi is based on the minimum overall embodied in ID3, C4, and the like [19], [20], [22].
Given
the expanded notation employed in this paper, algorithms will
entropy, i.e.
be presented for simple, joint, and conditional classification,
Simple Classijication Algorithm (SC):
Xi* = XiImjn[Hj(S,Xi)];i = 1,2,-.* ,a}
(7)
0.
S + T
At subsequent stages, dimensions already used for classifi- 1.
Compute H j , (S)
cation are excluded from the set of candidate dimensions 2.
If H 3 , ( S )= 0
stop
available.
The process continues recursively until no further
Else
classification is possible, i.e.,
(VXi, i = 1,2,.
..,n), Xi not selected before
Compute Hj, (S,Xi)
H j ( S ,Xi) = 0
(8)
Select XT = (Xilmin,[Hj,(S,X,)]; i = 1,2,.-.,n}
\dp in xip,p = 1,2,.
,ai
Drawing from information theory, joint entropy can be defined
s ( S I xi = Zip)
assuming classification on output dimensions c1, c2, . . .
,cm
Go to 1
simultaneously.
This is defined for the dual case first, and
The algorithm is simple, elegant, and is generally amenable
then extended to the multidimensional case.
to complete automation.
However, it may encounter some
difficulty under certain circumstances for the selection of X:,
if the entropy values are tied.
In this situation, ties need to
be resolved appropriately.
Several strategies can be employed
for resolving ties, including a first-come-first-select strategy, a
(6)
Authorized licensed use limited to: Purdue University.
Downloaded on December 3, 2008 at 16:37 from IEEE Xplore.
Restrictions apply.
188
IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON ENGINEERING MAMAGEMENT, VOL.
41, NO. 2, MAY 1992
random strategy, or a strategy based on semantic input from the case of conditional classification though, the observations
the decision maker.
Quinlan has advocated a strategy based on at the level may possess different values for the first output
probabilities of further classification [21].
It should be pointed dimension, but these will map to consistent values for the
out that the strategy used for the resolution of ties has a definite second output dimension.
impact on the structure of the decision tree, and hence affects
the efficiency and perhaps effectiveness of classification.
For
IV.
CONDITIONAL
CLASSIFICATION
the moment, it is assumed that a reasonable strategy is availFOR MANUFACTURING
SCHEDULING
able for breaking ties.
Section IVA.
lists available strategies
The utility of concept-based conditional classification is
for the application, and discusses implications of selecting a
investigated within the context of manufacturing scheduling.
specific strategy.
The algorithm for joint classification is identical to that for The problem involved the establishment of twin goals of
simple classification except that joint entropy is used instead production rate and workstation utilization, based on the
of the standard entropy measure.
The algorithm is presented manipulation of several controllable variables.
Given that there
for two output dimensions but can be easily extended to m is a tangible relationship between these goals, it follows that
concept-based classification is more appropriate than contextoutput dimensions.
based or user-defined conditional classification.
Joint ClassiJcation Algorithm (JC):
Observations for the classification algorithm C3 were gen0.
S + T
erated
by a simulation model.
A fraction of this data was
1.
Compute HJ1,32(S)
employed to generate the decision trees, and the balance
2.
If HJlr3,
( S )= 0
holdout set was used to test the effectiveness of the classificastop
tion algorithm.
The next few segments describe the problem
Else
setting, the simulation model, the decision tasks, and the
VX,, i = 1,2,.
,n, X; not selected before
experimental conditions in some detail.
Compute HJ1,j2
( S ,XZ)
Select X,* = {X,Imin;[H,,,j,(S,X,)];i
= i,2,...,n}
A. The Problem Setting
Vp in xZp,p= 1,2,..
,a,
+ (SIX; = x i p )
The simulation models a European factory that is engaged
Go to 1
in the production of industrial equipment.
It produces a wide
The algorithm for concept-based conditional classification variety of workpieces from eight major part families.
The
is presented for two output dimensions only, though it is production quantities and probability of occurrence determine
easily extensible to multiple dimensions.
The algorithm is the manufacturing mission for the system.
The physical layout
based on that for simple classification and is relatively simple.
of the plant is shown in Fig.
6.
The material flow in the
Classification on the first output dimension is performed system can be traced from the delivery of castings from
using the simple classification algorithm, SC.
Subsequent vendors.
These casting are delivered via the external material
classification employs a measure of conditional entropy, and handling system (EMHS) to a palletizing work area, where
is presented as algorithm CC.
they will be transferred to the stacker crane interface.
Castings
Concept-Based Conditional Classijication Algorithm(C3):
remain in the storage rack until required for production.
At
0.
Let C,, Cb represent the dimensions to be classified in the this stage, they are fetched by the stacker crane, taken to the
order specified.
material handling system (MHS) interface, and transported to
1.
Apply SC using C,, i.e. compute H,(S), H,(S, X,), etc.
the shuttle of the appropriate workstation.
After the operations
2.
Apply CC using c b , i.e. compute H+(S),Hbl,(S,X;),
are completed, material is routed back via the MHS to the
etc.
stacker crane, which places it back on the rack.
Conditional Classijication Algorithm (CC):
1.
The Simulation Model: The simulation model of the sys0.
S c T
tem is implemented in MAST in a PS/270 environment.
1.
Compute H,, ljl (S)
An overview of the model is presented here.
For further
2.
If H 3 1 , 3 2 ( s=) 0
details, the reader is referred to [7].
The model comprises two
stop
stacker cranes, four automatic guidance vehicles (AGV), four
Else
workstations, and three storage racks.
One stacker crane serves
VX,, i = 1,2,.
,n, X; not selected before
the EMHS through transfer of raw castings to the system and
finished products to storage.
The other handles the movement
compute HJ2J1
( S ,Xd
Select X,* = {X,lmin,[H,,,,,(S,X,)];i=
1,2,...,n} of fixtures, castings, and workpieces from storage racks to
Vpinz,,,p= 1,2,-.-,a,
the MHS interface.
The MHS component of the system also
encompasses turnout facilities so at to prevent blocking during
s + (S I x, = & p )
Go to 1
loading and unloading at a workstation.
Individual AGV’s can
It should be noted that the observations at the leaf level carry a single workpiece at a time.
The AGV’s interface with
for conditional classification will be different than those for workstations via a rotary shuttle that accommodates up to two
simple and joint classification.
In the case of simple or joint palletized workpieces.
Workstations in the system comprise
classification, the stopping rule ensures that the observations at a vertical machine center, two horizontal machine centers,
the leaf level share the same value of the output dimension.
In and a measuring system.
Individual storage racks are used
s
Authorized licensed use limited to: Purdue University.
Downloaded on December 3, 2008 at 16:37 from IEEE Xplore.
Restrictions apply.
CHATURVEDI AND NAZARETH: EFFECTIVENESS OF CONDITIONAL CLASSIFICATION APPLICATION TO MANUFACTURING SCHEDULE
I
!Backer
I
for castings, finished goods, fixtures, WIP, and also serve
as a buffer for the palletizing work area.
All stackers are
pass-through, enabling loading and unloading from either side.
For simplicity, only the major entities and their attributes
are described in this section.
The driving function for the
model is the arrival of orders.
The corresponding entity is
BATCHES, which consists of a number of WORKPIECES, and
their technological processing requirements, given by a ROUTING.
The routing is an ordered linear list of OPERATIONS
needed to transform a raw casting into a finished product.
The
operation specifies the type of WORKSTATION on which it is
to be performed and the duration of the operation.
The MHS
comprises several entities- STACKER, RACK, and AGV.
The
stacker crane serves the racks, while the AGV's move material
between the MHS interface and the respective workstations.
In
addition, each workstation interfaces with the AGV through a
SHUlTLE.
All stacker operations occur between the MHS interface and
the rack, with fetch and store times specified from computed
averages.
The prioritization of stacker resources for fetch and
store tasks presents a problem though.
If the stacker is idle,
then any request for service, either load or unload, would be
responded to immediately.
If another request arrives during
the execution of the activity, then it would be queued up,
and processed upon completion of the first task.
However,
when multiple tasks are queued, a first-come-first-serve approach would be clearly inappropriate.
For example, if two
AGV's arrive to unload workpieces, and while the first is
being unloaded, there is a request for a workpiece from a
workstation.
Since the MHS interface can accommodate only
one AGV at its bay, it would appear prudent that the request for
a workpiece be serviced by the first AGV, thereby displacing
the unload request from the second AGV.
The problem is
further complicated when batch priorities are to be included
in the analysis.
In the simulation model, all requests for
stacker functions were coordinated through a set of outstanding
notices, which logged the workpiece involved, its source and
destination, request timestamp, and the status of originating or
target resources.
This enabled some lookahead and planning
of efficient stacker utilization.
189
Since the amount of buffer space could not be accurately
estimated ahead of time, it was decided to model the racks with
unbounded capacity.
This allowed the tracking of maximum
storage requirements more accurately, while simultaneously
simplifying the location and retrieval problems.
Information
stored about the racks included current utilization, and location
of specific workpieces in the rack.
It was determined that, in principle, two AGV's would
suffice for the movement of material throughout the system.
However, given the possibility of breakdown, and the need to
provide reserve capacity, it was decided that up to four AGV's
would be employed.
As with the stacker, a set of outstanding
notices was also maintained for AGV's.
However, while each
stacker had its own list, a common list was maintained for all
AGV's.
The information tracked about AGV's included their
current status, location, destination (if applicable), and a code
to indicate if its progress was impeded for any reason.
Four workstations were employed in this system-two
horizontal spindle machines, one vertical spindle machine,
and a measuring machine.
Each workstation used a rotary
shuttle to transfer workpieces from the AGV to the machine.
The shuttle was capable of handling two workpieces, thereby
enabIing the next workpiece to be available when an operation
was completed.
This strategy was employed in an effort to
maximize workstation utilization.
One shuttle position was
always kept open to prevent station blockage.
Decisions as
to which workpiece would be loaded onto a workstation form
part of the control problem that is being investigated, and are
discussed in the next segment.
The parameters used during the simulation are based on
the actual data from the factory setting.
All units are in min
(or min2).
The arrival of batches was modeled as expo(700).
The type of workpiece was specified based on a histogram
specifying the relative probabilities of different workpieces.
The number of workpieces was drawn from U(5,15).
The
lead time for a batch was computed from an expected time
per workpiece multiplied by the batch size.
Workpiece operation times were drawn from N(750,40 000).
This lead time,
coupled with the arrival time, was used to specify the due date.
A workpiece could follow any of three possible routings, based
on prior probabilities of occurrence.
Each routing specified the
operations to be performed for producing the final product.
Within a routing, several variations were possible, reflecting a
spectrum of operation times.
As with the case of routings, the
variations were selected based on an input histogram reflecting
es.
The number of active batches in the system
was restricted to 2.
As soon as a batch was completed, another
was selected from the backlog of orders for completion.
The
selection of a specific order from this set formed the other
aspect of the control problem that was investigated as part of
this exercise.
2.
The Scheduling Tusk: The model affords significant variability in terms of physical design characteristics, operations
managed, and decision making strategies adopted.
Physical
design considerations include size and scope of the FMS,
as in working at the level of a facility, shop, or cell, with
a limited number of workstations, robots, material handling
system, and automated guided vehicles.
They also cover the
190
IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON ENGINEERING MAMAGEMENT, VOL.
41, NO. 2, MAY 1992
FMS organization including hierarchical or cellular design.
multiple scheduling criteria are to be used.
An alternative
Operations of interest in FMS scheduling and control include approach is to employ some combining function, as in a utility
the selection of parts from an order stream for inclusion in or other multi-criteria function, to simultaneously consider
the job stream, assignment of parts to cells for production, all desired scheduling criteria.
The multiple criteria decision
routing within the cell, loading and tooling decisions, and making literature provides several approaches to accomplish
maintenance of resources in the system.
Decision strategies this effectively, though it imposes a caveat that any such
will vary according to the operation at hand-e.g., part loading combining function is likely to be specific to the individual
decisions could follow heuristics as First-Come-First-Serve, decision maker, and hence of limited generalizability.
Second,
Shortest Processing Time, Earliest Due-Date, or other appro- and perhaps more important, the knowledge gleaned from such
priate strategy.
Clearly, the number of alternative scenarios for an approach is likely to be applicable to the chosen F M S
complete coverage of the domain represents an exponentially model only, thereby limiting its usefulness in other scheduling
complex term.
applications.
The task involved the selection and assignment of parts to
Given these restrictions, it was decided that classification
workstations in a cellular structure, with a view to achieving would be performed using the raw values of the output dispecific management goals.
The first decision addressed in mensions.
This does pose the risk that there may be individual
the scheduling process was the selection of a batch from the observations where the input dimensions are identical, but the
order stream for processing.
The decision was influenced by output dimensions differ.
This situation may be considered to
such factors as the need to maximize workstation utilization, be an anomaly.
Anomalies of this sort can be resolved in a
minimize work in process, and adhere to the due dates.
variety of ways.
The anomaly can be treated as a conflict, in
Decision strategies employed included the First-Come-First- which case the conflict is to be resolved prior to classification.
Serve, Shortest Processing Eme, Earliest Due Date and Min- This can be achieved by discarding either or both observations.
imum number of Jobs Remaining heuristic scheduling rules.
In situations where no information is available, both need to
The second decision of interest addressed the assignment of be discarded.
If expert assessment is possible, then only one
workpieces to workstations.
Factors of interest here included needs to be discarded.
Since scheduling experts were not easily
adherence to due dates, and utilization of cell resources, available, this approach was ruled out.
including workstation, AGV, and stacker cranes.
The same
The alternative strategy is to treat an anomaly as given,
four heuristic decision rules were employed at this stage too.
recognizing that both observations are genuinely possible.
In
The choice of heuristic scheduling rules was to some extent such cases, the classification algorithm will terminate at a
influenced by its relevance to the selected objectives, and point with non-zero entropy, indicating the inability to further
extent of usage in practical settings.
Consequently, scheduling classify.
A simple probabilistic strategy may be applied at this
rules that introduced significant complexity were omitted from stage, based on the relative size of the subsets involved.
Since
the analysis.
Additionally, this kept the problem tractable.
data was generated through the simulation model, it is possible
to ensure that no anomalies are present.
B. The Classijication Task
The application of the C3 algorithm differs from the traditional in some respects.
Normal classification applications
involve the use of explicit specification of all input and output
dimension values for each observation.
There is no room for
inconsistent observations.
Moreover, output dimension values
are treated as given.
These may be based on incontrovertible
facts as in whether a mushroom is poisonous or not, or may
be specified through expert opinion, as in when to accept an
application for credit.
In the case of F M S scheduling, the lack
of provably superior decision rules and the paucity of human
experts render this strategy for determining output dimension
values inadmissible.
Yet another strategy calls for the application of all decision rules in several simulation runs, and then selecting the
“best” for that scenario.
The “best” decision rule can then
be employed for classification tasks.
This approach, though
appealing in some respects, suffers from some obvious flaws.
First, the notion of “best” is not easily defined.
Several criteria
may be employed to evaluate FMS scheduling performance,
and the decision rule that is selected will vary with the
criteria.
This entails the creation of separate classification
tasks for each criterion, which aside from being potentially
expensive, provides little guidance to the decision maker when
C. Implementation of C3
The C3 algorithm used in this research was implemented in
C++ and runs on an IBM PS2flO.
Given the overall simplicity
of the algorithm, the choice of language was dictated more
by convenience rather than other factors as efficiency, data
structures supported, recursive ability, and the like.
One problem faced during the execution of the program was
the propensity to encounter situations where the conditional
entropies for several candidate dimensions were identical at
a classification stage.
This situation was termed a tie.
In
general, there are several mechanisms for breaking ties.
A
simple strategy is to select the first dimension as the preferred
dimension at all stages.
The initial ordering of dimensions
will dictate the resolution of ties under this strategy.
Another
strategy that can be employed involves the random selection
from the set of tied dimensions.
While this is relatively
easy to implement, it may lead to an unbalanced tree.
Yet
another strategy involves lookahead to determine which is the
preferred dimension for selection at this stage, based on the
information content of the next level of the tree.
However, this
approach violates the “greedy” structure of the classification
algorithms, and its logical extension would comprise a branchand-bound solution.
Authorized licensed use limited to: Purdue University.
Downloaded on December 3, 2008 at 16:37 from IEEE Xplore.
Restrictions apply.
191
CHATURVEDI AND NAZARETH: EFFECTIVENESS OF CONDITIONAL CLASSIFICATION: APPLICATION TO MANUFACTURING SCHEDULE
The above procedures are devoid of any semantic content,
using some information theoretic measures at best.
It may
sometimes be desirable to employ domain knowledge to
break ties.
This may be done at a global level, assuming
trakitivity of importance of individual dimensions, and the
overall importance can be then specified by an ordered list
of input dimensions.
If transitivity of preferences cannot be
guaranteed, then a matrix depicting pairwise preferences can
be used.
However, it may be the case that the preference for
utilizing a dimension at any stage over other tied dimensions
may indeed be context sensitive.
In this case, for every
branch of the decision tree, a list or matrix indicating relative
preference among dimensions is needed.
The overall objectives of the classification exercise will
dictate the strategy for resolving ties.
If the objective is merely
to create a decision tree that can be later employed at will
for classification purposes, then the random or first-come-firstselect approach may be useful.
If efficiency of classification is
a criterion of significant importance, the lookahead strategy is
preferred, in that it engenders parsimony of the resulting tree.
If, on the other hand, the classification exercise is intended
to shed light on the domain, such that this knowledge can
be employed at a later point, the semantic-based approach is
preferred.
This will facilitate the creation of systems that employ alternative knowledge structures, for example, production
rules, frames, and the like.
In this particular application of conditional classification, the
overall objective was to generate an effective decision tree,
Le., one which performed well on subsequent classification
tasks.
Parsimony of the tree, though desirable, was not the
overriding objective.
Since the knowledge encapsulated in the
tree will not be converted to other forms, semantic information
for breaking ties is not warranted.
Consequently, the random
strategy was employed to break ties.
D. Class@cation Exercises
The essential aim of the research was to assess the viability
of concept-based conditional classification for manufacturing
scheduling decisions.
Several mechanisms are available for
evaluating the outcome of the classification process.
One
strategy is to examine the outcome of the classification exercise itself.
This can be done from an information theoretic
perspective (e.g., parsimony of the decision tree), or from a
domain semantic perspective (where the tree is examined for
soundness of the classification rules).
A more effective strategy
involves the predictive validity of the resulting decision tree
by applying it to a set of new observations.
This study elected
to use a set of training observations to construct the decision
trees, and then evaluate its ability to effectively classify a set
of holdout data.
A set of 64 observations was employed for classification and
evaluation.
The input dimensions for classification included
batch data and cell status information, and are summarized in
Table I. Though there were several variables or dimensions that
could be manipulated in the simulation runs, it was decided
to restrict the number to a value that could be handled by a
human decision maker.
Further, only decision variables that
TABLE I
PUT DIMENSION
FOR CLASSIFICATION
Xi
zip
Batch characteristics
Number Bf-part -t ypes
Cell Status characteristics
Palette-capacit y
Number-ofAGVs
AGVspeed
WSavailability
Buffer-capacity
OUTPUT
2.
3
5, 6
2, 4
Low, High (100, 125)
3, -4
2, 3
TABLE II
DIMENSION
FOR CLASSFICATION
Cj
cjq
Production rate
Utilization
Met, Notmet
Met.