informs
Information Systems Research
Vol.
16, No. 1, March 2005, pp.
47–60
issn 1047-7047 eissn 1526-5536 05 1601 0047
®
doi 10.1287/isre.1050.0043
© 2005 INFORMS
Competition Among Sellers in Online Exchanges
Subhajyoti Bandyopadhyay
Warrington School of Business, University of Florida, Gainesville, Florida 32611,
shubho.bandyopadhyay@cba.uﬂ.edu
John M. Barron, Alok R. Chaturvedi
Krannert Graduate School of Management, Purdue University, West Lafayette, Indiana 47907
{barron@mgmt.purdue.edu, alok@mgmt.purdue.edu}
W
ith the advent of the Internet, and the minimal information technology requirements of a trading partner
to join an exchange, the number of sellers who can qualify and participate in online exchanges is greatly
increased.
We model the competition between two sellers with different unit costs and production capacities
responding to a buyer demand.
The resulting mixed-strategy equilibrium shows that one of the sellers has a
normal high price with random sales, while the other seller continuously randomizes its prices.
It also brings
out the inherent advantages that sellers with lower marginal costs or higher capacities have in joining these
exchanges, and provides a theoretical basis for understanding the relative advantages of various types of sellers
in such exchanges.
Key words: online exchanges; reverse auctions; pricing power; mixed-strategy equilibria
History: Tridas Mukhopadhyay, Senior Editor; H. R. Rao, Associate Editor.
This paper was received on
December 20, 2002, and was with the authors 11 months for 2 revisions.
Introduction
An example of a successful exchange is ChemConnect, a consortia-backed exchange connecting buyers
and sellers in industries such as chemicals, plastics,
pharmaceuticals, paper, and so on.
In 2002, its transaction volume exceeded $8.8 billion.
Another prominently mentioned example is Covisint, the online
marketplace formed by the Big Three automakers.
In the ﬁrst six months of 2001, the founders of
Covisint had channeled $33 billion, or 13% of their
annual purchase transactions, through the exchange
(Helper and MacDufﬁe 2001).2 A research report by
Roland Berger (2000), a specialized automotive industry consulting ﬁrm, estimates that 33% of the cost
savings in the North American auto industry will
Online exchanges for business-to-business (or B2B)
transactions have become ubiquitous in industries
ranging from automotive to retailing.1 The Wall
Street Journal (Angwin 2003) mentions the remarkable
turnaround of the B2B Internet commerce sector, and
that U.S. businesses spent $482 billion in B2B transactions, up 242% from two years earlier.
The online
research and consulting ﬁrm Jupiter Media Metrix predicts $5.4 trillion in goods and services will be transacted online among businesses by 2006, and a more
optimistic Gartner Group forecast estimates worldwide B2B commerce to swell to $5.9 trillion by the end
of 2004.
Forrester Research indicates that in the third
quarter of 2001, 49% of organizations that buy more
than $1 billion per year reported using an online auction, with most of them subsequently increasing their
usage of these venues.
2
Covisint has since sold off its auction division to FreeMarkets,
a leading B2B exchange, and has reinvented itself as a B2B solutions provider and standards maker for the automobile industry.
Although the automotive industry continues to implement B2B
solutions for communication, collaboration, and procurement, Covisint has decided to concentrate on the long-term beneﬁts of developing industrywide solutions and standards that promote B2B
practices within the industry.
1
Zhu (2004) deﬁnes a B2B exchange as “an online platform that
creates a trading community linked by the Internet and provides
the mechanism for B2B interactions using industry-wide data standards and computer systems” (p. 670).
47
48
Bandyopadhyay, Barron, and Chaturvedi: Competition Among Sellers in Online Exchanges
come from purchase-related savings fueled by Internet
technologies.
Three prominent and successful private exchanges
that are worth mention in the present context are GE
Global eXchange Services (GXS), with 100,000 trading partners (Tomak and Xia 2002), Dow Chemical
Co.
(which now conducts 15% of its business online,
a ﬁve-fold increase over 2,000 levels) (Angwin 2003),
and Wal-Mart, which started its own private exchange
in 2001.
Another growing trend is to use specialized
B2B software for private auctions.
For example, Gateway Inc. has extensively used Spend Management
Solutions from Ariba, one of the largest B2B solutions providers, to procure its components from Asian
manufacturers for its home electronics business.3
Carrier Corp., the world’s largest manufacturers of
air conditioners and one of the pioneers of using
online exchanges, quantiﬁed its own beneﬁts of using
this mechanism.
By putting its requirements online
through FreeMarkets, and thereby getting a larger
number of sellers to bid for the requirements, the
company realized average savings of 15% on the cost
of components, amounting to more than $100 million
(Fast Company 2001) of savings in the year 2000.
The
company ﬁrmly believes that the online exchanges
can be a powerful cost-cutting tool when there are
several vendors from which to choose, especially in
the current environment of worldwide sourcing for
components in the manufacturing sector.
ChemConnect provides the example of Sunoco Inc., a leading
manufacturer and marketer of petroleum and petrochemical products, which expanded its universe of
sellers by two and realized cost savings of 12%.4
3
Waltner (1999) gives the example of the oil-drilling company
Schlumberger Ltd. that realized a triple-digit return on investment
(ROI) from such online procurement software.
4
Not all transactions can be channeled through an exchange, however.
Our paper analyzes the competition among sellers in a fairly
general setting, regardless of industry, but the model is not applicable when the goods are heterogeneous (where other factors such
as quality variance, delivery schedules, and so on take precedence),
or when the supplier has a strategic relationship with the buyer
ﬁrm (such as developing new technologies).
Katok and Roth (2004)
points out that most B2B auctions are held for homogeneous goods.
As the Chief Information Ofﬁcer (CIO) of a supermarket retailer
comments in Barlas (2003), one cannot go to Procter and Gamble
to reverse auction Tide, but the process (through FreeMarkets) has
Information Systems Research 16(1), pp.
47–60, © 2005 INFORMS
B2B exchanges reduce transaction costs, add product and pricing transparency, generate market liquidity, and facilitate bidding by a broad spectrum
of potential suppliers in a standardized platform
(Zhu 2002).
In this paper, we analyze the competition between sellers who are bidding for the business
of large buyers.
This sort of competition is common in online exchanges that are called “buy-centric
markets” or “procurement hubs” in industry parlance.
(All the previously mentioned exchanges are
examples of such buy-centric markets.)
Although raw
materials and components seem to be natural candidates to be traded on such exchanges, as the example of Wal-Mart’s private exchange shows, any large
buyer of relatively homogeneous goods will have signiﬁcant interests in joining an exchange.
This homogeneity might come about in two ways: (1) where the
buyer ﬁrm is chieﬂy concerned with lowering costs
of the ﬁnal product so that price becomes the primary differentiator, and (2) where after meeting the
other criteria for selection (quality control, delivery
times, reliability, and so on), price remains as the surviving differentiator.
Thanks to the open standards of
these online technologies, the barrier to entry for a
new seller has become very low, compared with the
extremely costly interorganizational systems (or IOSs)
that were common a few years back.
One result is the
increasing diversity of the sellers that compete for a
request for proposal online.
Most B2B auctions are used to transact huge quantities of homogeneous goods (Katok and Roth 2004).
We analyze the case of competition between heterogeneous sellers of a single raw material or component
vying for business from a single large buyer within
a buy-centric B2B exchange framework.
We concentrate on the mechanism of a one-sided, sealed-bid
reverse auction.
We assume that open standards eliminate a capacity constraint in that all sellers combined
can supply the entire demand.
Individual ﬁrms, however, cannot fulﬁll the entire market’s demand.
This
means that although there is a competition between
the ﬁrms to be the low-price bidder (for prices above
a ﬁrm’s marginal cost), it is not as extreme as a
been successful for the company in decreasing prices up to 25% in
nonbranded segments such as vegetables or frozen foods or indirect items such as personal computers or stationery.
Bandyopadhyay, Barron, and Chaturvedi: Competition Among Sellers in Online Exchanges
Information Systems Research 16(1), pp.
47–60, © 2005 INFORMS
Bertrand game5 that results in prices equal to marginal cost.
As the nature of the equilibrium shows,
however, there remains an incentive to be the lowprice bidder and to have the ﬁrst invitation to supply
a requirement.
Our prior analysis (Bandyopadhyay and Barron
2004) considers the competition among sellers with
the same marginal costs of production and capacities.
Although the analysis shows the basic nature of the
equilibrium (for example, the existence of a mixedstrategy equilibrium for the sellers that randomize
their prices in an interval), it does not consider the
characteristics of equilibrium when sellers differ, a
key feature of B2B exchanges because they allow participation by a variety of sellers.
In this paper, we
arrive at an explicit characterization of an equilibrium
where the sellers have different marginal costs and
capacities, and can affect changes to both these strategic variables to compete effectively in this new market
environment.
The results provide a theoretical basis
for understanding the effect of these two variables in
electronic transactions.
Literature Review
Electronic exchanges can be thought of as intermediaries that bring together buyers and sellers.
Intermediaries have been analyzed in the economics literature
variously as time-saving agents, value-added agents,
and experts (see, for example, Rubinstein and Wolinsky 1987, Biglaiser 1993, and Boyd and Prescott 1986).
Bhargava et al.
(2000) analyzes the aggregation beneﬁt
that consumers derive from having access to multiple
providers through an intermediary.
The modern B2B electronic exchange can be considered under a broad class of technology called IOS,
the most common among them being the electronic
data interchange (EDI).
Several papers have studied
the effect of EDI (see, for example, Barua and Lee
1997, Riggins et al. 1994, Wang and Seidmann 1995,
Zhu 1999, and Zhu and Weyant 2003).
However, the
modern-day exchange differs signiﬁcantly from EDI
systems in terms of unprecedented data transparency
5
In a Bertrand competition, each seller assumes that the others will
maintain their current prices, leading to the use of a price-cutting
strategy, especially when the products are good substitutes.
Prices
thus get driven down toward marginal costs.
49
and open standards that make it easier for suppliers
to join the exchange (Zhu 2004).
Zhu (2004) looks at the effect of information transparency in electronic markets.
As the results of the
analysis show, it is this information transparency that
suppliers perceive as a threat to joining the online
exchanges (Jap 2000).
Conversely, the decreasing cost
of hardware and software (an Internet-enabled personal computer and a secure web browser are perhaps
the absolute minimum requirements) and the extensive use of open standards in developing the electronic exchanges of today have ensured the growth
in B2B marketplaces.
Dai and Kauffman (2003) argue
that in contrast to closed extranets, which were popular among large organizations and their sellers,
today’s electronic markets are open networks where
sellers have reduced information on buyers.6 In this
context, the characteristics of other sellers become relatively more important in determining seller strategy.
It is therefore important for the sellers to understand the dynamics of the competition in an online
exchange, and the impact of different production costs
and capacities of the sellers.
Prior research has analyzed several variations of competition under capacity constraints.
We refer to that research in the next
section.
Model Environment and Assumptions
Dai and Kauffman (2003) point out that, unlike closed
extranets, open electronic markets expose sellers to
increased competition from diverse competitors.
It is
this competition that we model in this paper.
In the
process, we look at a competitive game that is special in several respects.
First, the demand for materials posted on the exchange will tend to be inelastic.
The buyer decides on the quantity and the reservation price below which it is ready to buy the entire
quantity.7 Furthermore, any seller meeting the basic
6
Conversely, buyers gain from lower costs due to automating
the procurement process, reverse auctions, interoperability among
users, collaborative planning and collaborative design (Helper and
MacDufﬁe 2001).
7
We contacted Roland Berger (May 2002) to conﬁrm this assumption.
We found out that auto manufacturers indeed have “target
cost” structures for components, which is equivalent to the reservation price in our nomenclature.
See also Footnote 9.
50
Bandyopadhyay, Barron, and Chaturvedi: Competition Among Sellers in Online Exchanges
requirements of the buyer is qualiﬁed to bid.8 With
the advent of the online exchange, buyers put their
requirements on the exchange only once, instead of
contacting the sellers individually.
Sellers look at this
entire requirement, and then decide to quote their
prices.
The sellers are also given a date (usually several weeks in the future) by which they are expected
to place their bids.
Sellers bid their selling prices, all
of which are opened at a later date.
The seller with
the lowest-bid price gets the ﬁrst invitation to cater to
the demand, followed by the seller with the secondlowest bid price, and so on, until the entire demand
is met.9
From the modeling point of view, it is immaterial
whether the sellers respond to an aggregate demand
of several buyers (which might raise an antitrust
issue), or one single demand from a buyer.10 The
entire requirement is auctioned to the sellers, and a
lower-priced bidder has the ﬁrst turn to satisfy any
unfulﬁlled demand.11
With unlimited capacity, the sellers respond with
a Bertrand competition in prices wherein the seller
or sellers with the lowest marginal cost outbid the
others.12 This is not to the advantage of the sellers.
8
Wal-Mart, for example, has a seller certiﬁcation process, and a
seller standards program; similar vendor certiﬁcation programs are
common in a variety of industries, and nowadays many organizations detail these programs on the Internet, allowing for any potential seller worldwide to become certiﬁed.
9
A conﬁrmation of this mechanism was obtained from IndiaMarkets.com, India’s largest B2B portal.
The software used at IndiaMarkets.com is licensed from one of the pioneer B2B portals, Ariba.
The appendix shows an actual request for quote (RFQ) at this site,
as presented to sellers.
Identities have been concealed for conﬁdentiality reasons.
10
The assumption in the case of multiple buyers, of course, is that
all of them have the same reservation price.
If that is not so, we
would have to consider the contract between the buyers that speciﬁes the way they would divide a seller’s output between themselves.
11
The use of multiple vendors for the same component is very
much standard practice (Rubin and Benton 1993)—other than the
beneﬁts of competition, the practice also reduces the possibility
that the production is disrupted due to some problems of a single
vendor.
12
If Seller 1 knows that Seller 2 can supply to the entire demand,
he responds by charging Seller 2’s marginal price, because the best
response of Seller 2 at any higher price is to undercut it by an
inﬁnitesimal amount.
Information Systems Research 16(1), pp.
47–60, © 2005 INFORMS
Kreps and Scheinkman (1983), and several variants
of the original model, such as Allen et al.
(1992),
show that if sellers could limit capacity, then a quantity precommitment and Bertrand competition yield
Cournot outcomes that have equilibrium prices above
marginal cost.
At the other end of the spectrum, if the
total capacity of the sellers is so limited as to be less
than the total demand, the sellers can sell their entire
capacities at the buyer’s reservation price.13
Our model is different from either of these cases.
It is realistic to think of sellers having limited capacities so that any one seller cannot meet market demand.
In our setting, however, we add the condition that the aggregate output of the sellers exceeds
total quantity demanded and that a ﬁrm sells all it
can produce only if it is the low-price seller.
That is,
the lowest-priced seller sells to capacity, but a higherpriced seller only sells to a residual demand.
Sellers,
therefore, are pulled by two opposing forces; on the
one hand, higher prices fetch higher margins, but on
the other, higher prices bring about increased chances
of being underbid by competition and thus selling a
lesser amount.
Our analysis proceeds in three steps.
First, we consider the equilibrium obtained when both the sellers
have the same capacity and different marginal costs.
We then repeat the analysis for the same marginal
costs and different capacities.
These two analyses provide the intuition behind the results of the model with
asymmetric costs and capacities.
The Model
Our earlier paper (Bandyopadhyay and Barron 2001)
analyzes the equilibrium where two sellers have equal
capacity k that is individually less than the buyer’s
total requirement Q (the speciﬁc functional form of
the demand is suggested in Varian 1980), but the
combined capacity exceeds total demand so that
2k > Q > k. In such a setting, the lower-priced seller
is invited ﬁrst to sell the required quantity, and after
it has supplied its total capacity k, the other seller
can then sell the residual demand Q − k . Both sellers have a common ﬁxed marginal cost of production, c. There exists a mixed-strategy equilibrium for
13
Because either seller can sell to capacity at or below the reservation price, there is no incentive for either to undercut competition.
Bandyopadhyay, Barron, and Chaturvedi: Competition Among Sellers in Online Exchanges
Information Systems Research 16(1), pp.
47–60, © 2005 INFORMS
this game (the existence of a mixed-strategy game
with discontinuous payoffs is proved in Dasgupta
and Maskin 1986), with both sellers randomizing their
prices based on the probability distribution
F p =
p−c k− r −c Q−k
p − c 2k − Q
(1)
between the interval p1 r , where p1 is given by
p1 =
r −c Q−k
+c
k
(2)
and r is the buyer’s reservation price.
Because diversity among sellers is an important
aspect of B2B exchanges, we now look at the generalized two-seller game where the sellers i = 1 2, can
have different marginal costs or capacities, or both.
We assume, without loss of generality, that c1 ≤ c2 , and
that k2 = k1 , where is any positive real number.
We
retain the assumption that ki < Q, i = 1 2, but that
i=1 2
ki = 1 +
k1 > Q
If sellers charge the same price, following the convention of Deneckere and Kovenock (1996), the one with
the lower cost sells its capacity.
If sellers charge the
same price and sellers have the same cost, we arbitrarily have Seller 1 sell its capacity.
As Sinha (2000) points out, the use of reverse-auction bidding, XML mapping, and so on allow participants in these exchanges to see the price ﬂoors of the
various players more easily than is possible in traditional markets.
Therefore, the assumption of the various costs and capacities as common knowledge seems
reasonable.
For seller i, deﬁne pi∗ as the minimum price it will
set to sell its capacity ki given the alternative of selling
the residual Q − ki at the maximum price r. Neither
seller has an incentive to price below pi∗ = r − ci ·
Q − kj /kj + ci , which we call the seller’s indifference
price.
Seller 1, the low-cost seller, will have p1∗ < p2∗ if and
only if
c1 − c2
Q− 1+
k1 /k1 > 1 −
r
(3)
If the two sellers have the same capacity ( = 1, such
that k1 = k2 = k , then Seller 1 will have a lower minimum price p1∗ < p2∗ , given that the residual demand
51
is less than capacity 2k > Q > k . If the two sellers
have the same cost c1 = c2 = c , then the seller with
the higher capacity will have a lower minimum price.
Below we reconsider the equilibrium with heterogeneous sellers.
We begin our analysis by focusing on
the case where capacities are identical k1 = k2 = k
but Seller 1 has a lower marginal cost c1 < c2 .
The analysis extends the existence results of
Deneckere and Kovenock (1996), which focuses on
how the costs or capacity differences can lead to
different characterizations of equilibrium—pure strategy versus mixed—in a Bertrand-Edgeworth framework.
Our speciﬁcation of the functional form of the
demand allows us to present explicit solutions for
the mixed-strategy equilibrium price distributions of
heterogeneous sellers who differ in their marginal
costs as well as production capacities.
These explicit
solutions allow one to generate testable implications
regarding the effect of changes in the magnitude of
cost or capacity differences on parameters of the distributions.
In doing so, we offer speciﬁc guidance to
researchers pursuing empirical analysis in this area.
In addition, our explicit results for the special cases
of cost differences only and capacity differences only
provide the intuition behind the general theory, and
thus make the general theory more accessible.
Heterogeneity in Cost
We ﬁrst establish the general character of the equilibrium, if it exists, as a mixed-strategy equilibrium.
Thus we have the following proposition.
Proposition 1.
There can be no pure strategy in prices.
Suppose the low-cost seller (Seller 1) charges a
single price.
In this case, the best response of the highcost seller (Seller 2) is to charge a price an inﬁnitesimal amount lower and sell to capacity to obtain the
highest proﬁts if the price is in the interval p2∗ r , or if
the price is equal to or below p2∗ , charge a price equal
to the maximum price r and sell the residual demand
to obtain the highest proﬁts.
Now suppose the highcost seller charges a single price.
In this case, the
best response of the low-cost seller is to charge the
same price and sell to capacity to obtain the highest proﬁts if the price is in the interval p1∗ r . If the
price is below p1∗ , the best response of the low-cost
seller to charge a price equal to the maximal price r
52
Bandyopadhyay, Barron, and Chaturvedi: Competition Among Sellers in Online Exchanges
and sell the residual demand to obtain the highest
proﬁts.14
At any set of prices p1 p2 set by the two sellers, the above characterization of the best response
for each seller ensures that at least one seller would
seek to change the price.
In particular, any time the
low-cost seller matches the high-cost seller’s price, the
high-cost seller has the incentive to charge a different
price.
Thus, there is no pure-strategy equilibrium.
Let
the mixed strategy in prices for seller i be represented
by Fi p .
We now use the ordering of the pi∗ to present a key
feature of the mixed-strategy equilibrium: The lower
support for both sellers is equal to the higher of the
two indifference prices.
Information Systems Research 16(1), pp.
47–60, © 2005 INFORMS
the bid at price p (an event we call a success) is given
by si p , whereas the proﬁt realized by the seller if
it loses the bid at price p (a failure) is given by fi p .
In general, if a mixed-strategy equilibrium exists, it
must provide for each seller identical proﬁts at all
prices charged.
We now have the following characterization of the equilibrium price density functions.
For
seller i, proﬁts at all prices must equal the proﬁt level
at r, such that
i
Proposition 3.
For any p ∈ p∗ r , Fi p is strictly
increasing.
If this is not the case, let there be an interval p p
where f p = 0.
For any p where p < p < p , seller i
can get the same outcome of either selling to capacity ki , or by selling the residual Q − kj , as by pricing
at the lower p , but get a higher payoff.
We now provide a characterization of equilibrium
for the case of different costs c1 < c2 but identical capacities k1 = k2 = k when p1∗ < p2∗ . Although
the proposed characterization is proved to be a valid
and plausible equilibrium of the game G k1 k2 c1 c2 ,
there might be other Nash equilibria to the game.
We denote the proﬁt of any seller i at a price p to
be i p . The proﬁt realized by the seller if it wins
14
Note that this property is an effect of the nature of the demand
curve.
If the sellers faced a downward sloping demand curve, it is
possible (depending on the exact functional form of the demand
curve) that the sellers respond with a pure-strategy equilibrium.
We thank one of the referees for pointing this out.
i
r
i=1 2
(4)
where
i
Proposition 2.
If pi∗ < pj∗ , the minimum support price
for Fi p , i = 1 2, is the higher of the two indifference
prices pj∗ .
The above follows from the fact that seller i has no
incentive to price below pi∗ , the seller’s indifference
price, because the seller always have the higher-proﬁt
alternative of selling at least to residual demand at
price r. This pi∗ is the price at which the seller i makes
the same proﬁt by supplying its entire capacity as by
supplying the residual demand at r.
p =
p =
si
p 1 − Fj p +
1
r ≡
s1
p Fj p
(5)
p = p − ci k
(6)
p = p − ci Q − k
(7)
si
fi
fi
r 1 − F2 r +
f1
r F2 r
(8)
and
2
r ≡
f2
r
(9)
Proposition 4.
If a mixed-strategy equilibrium exists,
the pricing strategy of the low-cost seller, Seller 1, is deﬁned
by a continuous distribution over the range p2∗ r with no
mass15 at any price.
High-cost Seller 2’s pricing strategy
is also deﬁned by a continuous distribution over the range
p2∗ r , but Seller 2 now places a positive mass at the upper
bound of the distribution r .
The above characterization has Seller 1’s pricing
strategy similar to the characterization we obtained
for the symmetric case.
However, unlike the symmetric case, Seller 2’s pricing strategy now has ﬁrst-order
stochastic dominance over Seller 1’s pricing strategy,
such that F2 p < F1 p for all p < r. The interpretation of this outcome is that the high-cost seller has
a normal price equal to the r, but engages in random sales.
The low-cost seller engages in sales (price
below r) almost always, and thus is more likely to sell
to capacity.
15
By mass, or by the phrase placing mass later in this paper, we
mean that a seller places a positive probability of choosing a particular strategy (in our case, choosing a particular price) in the
mixed-strategy distribution.
In other words, the cumulative density
function has a discontinuity at that price.
Bandyopadhyay, Barron, and Chaturvedi: Competition Among Sellers in Online Exchanges
53
Information Systems Research 16(1), pp.
47–60, © 2005 INFORMS
A key feature of the above equilibrium, a positive
mass at r for the high-cost seller, ensures proﬁts for
the low-cost seller at r that exceed what could be
obtained by simply selling to the residual demand.
The higher proﬁts for Seller 1 are achieved with a
mass by Seller 2 at r, because there now exists a positive probability that Seller 1 will not be the highpriced seller at r, and thus (as the low-cost producer),
can sell capacity at r with positive probability.
This
higher level of proﬁts for the low-cost seller holds at
all other prices as well, and in particular at the lower
bound p2∗ , given that p1∗ < p2∗ .
Using (5) through (9), we therefore have
F1 p =
s2
p −
s2
p −
f2
r
f2
p
(10)