ISeB (2006) 4: 25–48
DOI 10.1007/s10257-005-0021-6
O R I GI N A L A R T I C L E
Alok R. Chaturvedi Æ Shailendra Raj Mehta
Daniel Dolk Æ Mukul Gupta
Computational experimentations in market
and supply-chain co-design: a mixed agent
approach
Published online: 20 October 2005
Ó Springer-Verlag 2005
Abstract The synthetic environment for analysis and simulations (SEAS) is a
computational experimentation environment that mimics real life economies,
with multiple interlinked markets, multiple goods and services, multiple
ﬁrms and channels and multiple consumers, all built from the ground up.
It
is populated with human agents who make strategically complex decisions
and artiﬁcial agents who make simple but detail intensive decisions.
These
agents can be calibrated with real data and allowed to make the same
decisions in this synthetic economy as their real life counterparts.
The
resulting outcomes can be surprisingly accurate.
This paper discusses the
research in this area and goes on to detail the architecture of SEAS.
It also
presents a detailed case study of market and supply-chain co-design for
business-to-business e-commerce in the PC industry.
1 Introduction
The fundamental tenet of business-to-business (B2B) e-commerce is disintermediation in relatively ‘‘frictionless’’ economies.
The advent of e-com-
A. R. Chaturvedi (&) Æ S. R. Mehta Æ D. Dolk Æ M. Gupta
Krannert Graduate School of Management,
Purdue University, West Lafayette, IN 47907, USA
E-mail: alok@purdue.edu
Tel.: +1-765-4949048
Fax: +1-765-4941526
E-mail: mehta@mgmt.purdue.edu
E-mail: drdolk@nps.edu
E-mail: Mukul.Gupta@Business.uconn.edu
26
A. R. Chaturvedi et al.
merce has shrunk the competitive ‘‘time to market’’ window for new products substantially, particularly in the area of technology products themselves.
The pressure to be ‘‘ﬁrst to market’’ and establish ‘‘lock in’’ is intense for
companies in the software, web, and telecommunications industries.
With
such compressed timelines, the probability of new product success is often
more a matter of good fortune than of careful analysis and preparation.
Intuitively, the notion of co-design i.e., integrating all design activities in
parallel is an appealing alternative, which a priori one would suspect is
superior to the serial approach.
Co-design has been used successfully, particularly in designing embedded hardware and software systems.
This paper uses the computational experimentation method to analyze
the co-design approach to the problem of designing the supply chain in the
PC industry.
This is an intensely competitive market marked by rapid
change, extremely short product development times, and very short shelf
lives.
Corporations cannot aﬀord to make very many mistakes in this climate, or they risk losing market share.
By adopting a co-design approach, we
argue that ﬁrms have a higher probability of aligning products with markets,
and thus maintaining their competitive edge.
The co-design approach that we
use to integrate the convergent technology product design processes is a
hybrid of microeconomic and OR modeling, namely experimental economics
complemented by agent-based simulation (ABS).
In an interesting paper
which provides an industry perspective on eﬃciently co-designing the demand and supply chains in an industry, Murphy-Hoye (2002) has said,
‘‘Excel spreadsheets and email are no longer suﬃcient tools for complex
collaborative business interaction.
Enhanced or new modeling and simulation and techniques will be needed to improve planning capabilities and
enable earlier identiﬁcation of potential problems.’’ This paper is a step in
this direction.
Toward this end, we create a synthetic economy to study a computational
model of human decision making in the context of B2B e-commerce.
There
are several important aspects of B2B e-commerce, e-CRM, e-procurement,
e-R&D, e-fulﬁllment, e-service, and e-manufacturing (Swenson et al. 1998;
Kaplan and Sawhney 2000; Ramsdell 2000; Timmers 1999; Nagurney 2002;
Lucking-Reiley and Spulber 2001; Fensel et al. 2001).
We implement agents
and simulate diﬀerent business models to study the decision-making process
by creating their computational models.
The remainder of the paper is organized as follows: Sect.
2 presents the
importance of the problem and the background research.
Section 3 describes
the concept of synthetic economies and presents the technical architecture of
synthetic environment for analysis and simulations (SEAS).
Section 4 presents the case study of application of SEAS to B2B e-commerce in the PC
industry.
Finally, Sect.
5 concludes the paper.
2 Importance of the problem
Understanding electronic marketplaces is one of the keys for corporations in
making the transition from the ‘‘old’’ to the ‘‘new’’ economy.
Although
Computational experimentations in market
27
many claim that the ‘‘old’’ and the ‘‘new’’ will converge and e-business will
become just plain old business as the years unfold, companies still struggle
with the rapid changes e-business has wrought on the landscape.
The ﬁner
granularity of customer relationship management, disintermediation and
reintermediation of the supply chain, B2B exchanges, and the evolution of
agent technology are just some of the phenomena that have emerged from
the electronic marketplace (Bailey and Bakos 1997).
Although these processes will undoubtedly be assimilated into the
‘‘business as usual’’ environment at some point, they require new approaches
and tools for analysis and modeling.
This is particularly true in the area of
economics where the standard neoclassical economic model has proven to be
inadequate in capturing the dynamic evolution brought about by technological change.
E-business faces a number of paradoxes.
These competing issues, such as
the conﬂict between trading exchanges and customer relationship management, Internet market eﬃciency, and competitive pricing etc., have to be
resolved by every e-business that is to be successful in the market place.
A
major problem is that decision makers would have to draw upon techniques
from various disciplines.
In this paper, we discuss the new decision-making
technology of ABS and its role in addressing some of the critical problems
that arise in electronic marketplaces.
Speciﬁcally, we look at ABS as an
engine for building synthetic economies that can, in turn, be used as the basis
of analyses for the e-business phenomena discussed above.
The ABS-driven
economy, consisting of many thousands of software agents whose emergent
behavior deﬁnes the marketplace, can be used as a platform with which
human players can engage in strategic decision-making simulations.
ABS in
this context is a hybrid of microeconomic analysis combined with the OR/
MS discipline of simulation (although a much diﬀerent, bottom-up kind of
simulation when compared with the typical top-down discrete event simulation).
This approach wherein human players can participate concurrently
with an agent-based economy oﬀers the following beneﬁts:
– The seamless integration of human and software agents: this allows signiﬁcantly more complex experiments to be conducted than are currently
possible in the ﬁeld of experimental economics (Kagel and Roth 1995).
These experiments can combine depth of decision making (using humans)
and breadth (combining artiﬁcial agents).
– The consequences of decisions can be measured: this extends the purview
of traditional decision support from building models that support human
decision making to actually being able to gauge the impacts of decisions as
well.
– A laboratory for testing the eﬃcacy of decision support tools: experiments
can be devised that measure the eﬀects of various decisions against the
support tools used to arrive at those decisions.
For the ABS approach to work eﬀectively, viable virtual economies must
be constructed.
This requires careful attention to the design and speciﬁcation
of the agents who will populate the economy.
This demands that we will be
able to access reliable, accurate computational models of human behavior
28
A. R. Chaturvedi et al.
which we can then invoke appropriately upon our population of agents to
achieve a marketplace behavior with acceptable verisimilitude.
There is a
vast repository of such models from disciplines such as experimental economics, artiﬁcial intelligence, cognitive science, psychology, and decision
theory.
2.1 Shortcomings of classical economics
The standard economic model is that of homo economicus.
This is basically a
constrained optimization exercise.
An agent starts with an objective (maximize proﬁt, maximize utility) and a choice set (deﬁned by a budget constraint
or an endowment or input prices), and computes the optimal solution.
This
solution is then implemented in a setting with certain rules (a market, a
bilateral negotiation) and those rules then, perhaps after several iterations
determine an outcome (an allocation, prices).
This standard model (e.g.
Kreps 1990; MasColell et al. 1995) forms the basis of much of economics
and a signiﬁcant amount of management modeling.
However, in recent years, at least three strands of literature have converged to upset this neat and somewhat limited view of human behavior.
These include experimental economics (Kagel and Roth 1995), learning
(Fudenberg and Levine 1999), and behavioral economics (Mullainathan and
Thaler 2000).
Experimental economics shows that while some parts of economic theory held up reasonably well (such as static markets with bids and
asks), others such as individual decision making did not, and were subject to
biases, errors, and misperceptions.
Behavioral economics complements
experimental economics quite nicely by looking for ﬁeld data as opposed to
experimental data and showing that many of the same biases are found in
real life.
Similarly, learning theory assumes that rational behavior does not
emerge fully formed but through a great deal of trial and error.
It is worth quoting in detail an excerpt from a recent survey (Mullainathan and Thaler 2000) to underscore just how radical a departure this is.
They conﬁne themselves to the ﬁeld of ﬁnance, but their remarks apply much
more generally.
If economists had been asked, 20 years ago in a poll, to name the domain
in which bounded rationality was least likely to ﬁnd useful applications,
the likely winner would have been ﬁnance.
The limits of arbitrage arguments were not well understood and that time, one leading economist had
called eﬃcient markets hypothesis the best-established fact in economics.
Times change.
Now as we begin the twenty-ﬁrst century, ﬁnance is perhaps
the branch of economics where behavioral economics has made the
greatest contributions.
Two factors contributed to the surprising success of behavioral ﬁnance.
First, ﬁnancial economics in general and the eﬃcient market hypothesis in
particular generated sharp testable predictions about observable phenomena.
Second, there are great data readily available to test these sharp
predictions.
Computational experimentations in market
29
They add:
The standard economic model of human behavior includes (at least) three
unrealistic traits, unbounded rationality, unbounded willpower, and unbounded selﬁshness.
These three traits are good candidates for modiﬁcation.
With this in mind what sort of modeling approach might supplement the
standard economic model?
Clearly a broad-based approach is required that
incorporates insights from a variety of disciplines, including psychology,
management, and economics.
2.2 Agent behavior
Traditionally, economics, and by extension, large sections of management
have largely been insulated from the rest of the social sciences.
However, if
the assumptions of the standard model are modiﬁed, then the door is opened
for importing signiﬁcant insights from the sister disciplines, such as psychology, that have had a long history of studying behavior as observed, as
opposed to behavior, as deduced from a set of axioms.
Clearly then, there is
signiﬁcant motivation for building agents that engage in speciﬁc behaviors as
opposed to optimization.
One can then put them together in increasingly
complex environments to see what sort of behavior results emerge (Epstein
and Axtell 1996).
However, much more sophisticated agents are required.
At
least four classes of capabilities have to be modeled in detail—including
information gathering, information processing, responsiveness, and interaction.
For example, Downs-Martin (1997) indicates that the informationprocessing part might consist of the behaviors as listed in Table 1.
Table 1 Agent behavior verbs
Actions
Simple deﬁnitions
Acquire
Alert
Detect
Discriminate
Extract
Filter
Identify
Inspect
Localize
Monitor
Recognize
Orient
Perceive
Queue
Read
Receive
Search
To
To
To
To
To
To
To
To
To
To
To
To
To
To
To
To
To
gain by one’s own eﬀorts, to obtain
warn to be ready or watchful
discover something hidden, to notice, to observe
distinguish between things
deduce or derive, to take out from
strain out unwanted data and so forth
ﬁx a person or thing as the one described
look at carefully
trace to a particular place, discover the position of
watch, check, regulate performance
identify as known before
adjust to a particular situation
become aware of via senses, grasp mentally
form up in a line
get meaning by interpreting characters
take or get freely given information
examine carefully for a thing concealed, survey
30
A. R. Chaturvedi et al.
It is important to analyze and classify these behaviors with a view to
applying them in a broad range of social disciplines, in a collaborative and
modular fashion.
One sort of modeling paradigm that might work hand in
hand with the new departures from the standard model is agent-based
modeling techniques.
3 Agent-based economies and SEAS
Agent-based techniques have gained prominence in management and economics (Gode and Sunder 1993, 1997; Duﬀy 2001; Lopez-Paredes et al.
2002) and this area shows much promise in terms of addressing the three
challenges to the standard model, outlined above.
The motivation for agent-based economies is as follows.
Rust (1996)
argues that researchers are forced to build models which are either stylized
enough to be solved analytically or small enough to be solved computationally.
Each of these kinds of models is, in Rust’s words, a ‘‘toy model.’’
Moreover, such models are not modular and cannot be built up cumulatively
by large teams of researchers working together, each developing a separate
piece of the puzzle.
Therefore, Rust suggests that we mimic the intelligence
demonstrated in the organization of the market and use decentralized
computing along with agents to study these models.
Rust’s suggestion is
quite appealing.
He mentions a number of desiderata for such an agentbased environment.
Among them is the ability to seamlessly integrate human
and artiﬁcial agents in the same environment.
It would allow experiments of
greater complexity and of a larger scale than those possible with existing
software such as the pioneering MUDA program, developed by Plott and
Gray (1990) at Caltech.
This would truly enable multidisciplinary research.
Computer-based information systems would be integrated with economics to
create synthetic economies that could be used as a common meeting ground
for techniques from operations research, management science, psychology,
and computer science.
This, then, is the promise of agent-based research.
Of crucial importance is the ability to put human and artiﬁcial agents in
the same environment.
This allow us to leverage human capabilities to make
complex decisions (such as running ﬁrms or channels) and to leverage the
large numbers of artiﬁcial agents that can be deployed to capture ﬁne details
of market segments.
Moreover such mixed environments allow us to calibrate human and artiﬁcial agents against each other.
For example, can we
mimic a particular human behavior (such as trading) in a narrow domain
(such as a simple double auction market) by using artiﬁcial agents?
Similarly,
can we calibrate the complexity of a decision-making task performed by
human beings on the basis of the complexity of the artiﬁcial agent that might
be able to mimic it?
In a recent landmark paper, Green (2002) argues that
role-playing is extremely valuable in helping predict the outcomes of conﬂict
situations, often doubling the accuracy of prediction and catapulting
amateurs ahead of seasoned experts.
Similarly Shubik (1975) stated that
‘‘an extremely valuable aspect of operational gaming is the perspective
gained by viewing a conﬂict of interests from the other side.
Experience
gained in playing roles foreign to one’s own interests may provide insights
Computational experimentations in market
31
hard to obtain in any other manner.’’ This paper provides a joint environment incorporating ABS techniques and techniques of experimental economics to provide a rich domain in which participants may gain experience.
In the past, machine learning has primarily been used for classiﬁcation
problems.
Now, these techniques are increasingly being used in decision
support (Chaturvedi et al. 1993), real-time system control, production process control; product design and control knowledge (Chaturvedi and Gulati
1993; Chaturvedi and Nazareth 1998); scheduling and control of ﬂexible
manufacturing systems.
Now machine-learning techniques are being used to
comprehensively model human behavior in markets in the form of shopbots
(artiﬁcially intelligent agents which help consumers buy goods and services at
the best price) (Guttman et al. 1998; Chavez and Maes 1996; Bichler et al.
1998; Hedberg 1996) and pricebots (artiﬁcially intelligent agents which help
sellers determine the optional price) (Chavez and Maes 1996).
The extraction of human knowledge and behavior requires careful
planning.
New knowledge has to be reconciled with existing rules.
Conﬂicts
must be resolved satisfactorily.
Likewise, the potential utility of the new rules
also needs to be examined prior to inclusion.
Rules that are very speciﬁc, and
are unlikely to ﬁnd application, may be discarded.
In a similar vein, extremely general rules are unlikely to be included, as they are more prone to
generating conﬂict.
This is the balance that needs to be struck and a particular instance of which is described below in the modeling of our consumer
artiﬁcial agents.
3.1 Synthetic environment for analysis and simulations
Synthetic environment for analysis and simulations is an interactive synthetic
economy that models the critical relationships between economies, markets,
product and process innovations, price, and business rules using human and
artiﬁcial agents.
It allows participants to view the economy from diﬀerent
perspectives such as the government, universities, commercial sectors, and
households/consumers/tax payers.
The SEAS computational infrastructure allows large number of human
players to interact with hundreds of thousands of artiﬁcial agents.
We brieﬂy
describe the architecture in the Appendix.
4 PSEAS: a PC industry case study
These ideas have been implemented in an artiﬁcial economy which mimics
the behavior of the PC industry.
The particular issue that we seek to
address is as follows.
B2B e-commerce is the new battleground for ﬁrms in
the PC industry.
Dell Computers pioneered the direct-sales business model
that every other PC maker is trying to emulate, but with limited success.
In this disintermediated model, an original equipment manufacturer
(OEM) abandons distributors, wholesalers, and retailers and sells directly
to the end customer.
There are several advantages of this model.
First, by
manufacturing computers to order, the company economizes inventory
32
A. R. Chaturvedi et al.
and prevents the depreciation due to technological obsolescence.
Second,
it allows the OEM to be paid before it manufactures computers and sells
to its suppliers.
Third, it allows the OEM to capture the lucrative margins
on add-on services such as warranties, ﬁnancing, upgrades, and portal
services.
So, what prevents the other PC makers from adopting the direct model?
With the traditional business model, OEMs developed a web of relationships
with the channel ﬁrms, who do the assembly and supply to the ﬁnal customers.
The problem is that the latter ‘‘own’’ the customers, and provide the
proﬁtable parts of the computer value chain—the add-ons.
By going direct, a
traditional computer company runs the risk of alienating the channel.
If that
happens, the intermediary can set up competing operations by teaming up
with generic PC makers.
To analyze these questions we set up a synthetic
economy as follows:
1.
In the SEAS environment, we create a synthetic economy representing the
PC industry and populate it with four classes of agents—computer
makers, channels and service providers, and business customers.
2.
We divide the business customers into three segments—small, medium,
and large.
Each of these segments has two subsegments—the ‘‘self-integrator’’ segment and ‘‘need help’’ segment.
We calibrate the behavior of
the artiﬁcial agents to closely resemble that of the segment they represent
in the ‘‘real economy.’’
3.
We allow human agents to play the roles of computer makers and
channels while thousands of artiﬁcial agents perform the roles of business
customers.
4.
There are two classes of products sold in the economy—goods and services.
The goods sold in the market are the base units and add-on options.
Each of these goods has ﬁve levels representing ﬁve diﬀerent qualities.
There are four classes of services—warranty, implementation, ﬁnancing,
and portal.
5.
Firms can make diﬀerent types of investments to improve their performance—such as ease of doing business, e-branding, sales force, information portal, facilitation, transactions, and integration.
4.1 Business process modeling
PSEAS focuses on how various entities in the value-chain function and interoperate under diﬀering external circumstances.
The ‘‘Aha!’’ experiences
from playing the game increased the participants’ insights and awareness
into the following issues:
– Adoption of diﬀerent e-biz models by the players in response to the
changes in environment;
– Interaction among the various entities in the value chain (e.g., manufacturers, traditional channels, e-channels);
– Implications of a manufacturer going ‘‘direct’’ on its channel partners;
– Nature of channel conﬂicts and their implications;
Computational experimentations in market
33
– Eﬀect of B2B exchanges on manufacturers’ and channels’ margins, market
shares, and proﬁtability;
– The sustainability of these business models?
One of the most important decisions that participants have to make in the
exercise is in which market are they going to choose to sell their products.
They have to decide if they will take the risk to antagonize the channels, if
they segregate products by channels, and how to mark up products
according to channels, etc. PSEAS e-business model alternatives are presented in Fig.
1.4.1.1 Human players’ overall choices
Manufacturers have the following choices:
1.
Design product class and conﬁguration—should they sell stripped down
models or models loaded with options?
2.
Should they just sell hardware or bundle the hardware with services?
3.
Sell to the channels, whether they are traditional brick and mortar distributors (BM) or e-distributors (ED).
A manufacturer makes an oﬀer to
a distributor by sending him/her a message with the product type,
quantity, and price.
The distributor may accept or reject the oﬀer.
4.
Sell direct to end customers.
5.
Sell through B2B exchange to channels or to customers.
Manufacturers
can create their own exchange and invite customers and suppliers (suppliers of manufacturers are not included in the model) to join them or
they may choose join an existing exchange.
6.
Sell through the neutral B2B marketplace.
Figure 2 shows the interface of a PC manufacturer.
The cost, quantity,
price, and outlet for the goods are shown in the picture.
By contrast, Fig.
3
shows the production screen where the product is conﬁgured and then
Fig.
1 The business models in PSEAS
34
A. R. Chaturvedi et al.
priced.
It shows the various combinations of processor speed and add-ons
that are available.
Traditional distributors have the following choices:
1.
Sell direct to customers, whether it is through their web site or their stores,
2.
Create a B2B exchange and have their suppliers and manufacturers join it
to facilitate transaction (but do not allow the competition to join),
3.
Join or create a neutral B2B marketplace (with the competition).
E-distributors can:
1.
Create a B2B exchange and have their suppliers join it to facilitate
transactions (but do not authorize the competition to join it),
2.
Join a neutral B2B marketplace,
3.
Create a neutral B2B marketplace and play the role of a neutral agent.
Overall there are four diﬀerent distribution business model choices for the
players:
1.
Channel: manufacturers sell to channels.
2.
Direct: manufacturers and channels sell directly to customers through the
traditional method or via their web sites.
3.
B2B exchange: manufacturers or distributors open their own marketplace
and allow their suppliers and customers to join or join a supplier/customer B2B marketplace.
4.
B2B e-hub (neutral exchange): several competitors in the industry at
diﬀerent positions in the supply chain (manufacturers, distributors, and
customers) join a neutral marketplace.
A player can conﬁgure the product by clicking on the base and option
levels and can create a bundle by clicking on the service button.
He/she can
Fig.
2 PSEAS B2B interface
Computational experimentations in market
35
Fig.
3 The production interface
set the markup by clicking on the individual oﬀering or on the entire row or
column.
The marginal costs of production (which is assumed to be ﬁxed for
simplicity) for the various goods and services a ﬁrm produces are known to
it.
It chooses prices by choosing markups over cost.
Production levels are
chosen by ﬁrms for each category of goods and services.
Once a particular
level of the good is produced, its marginal cost times quantity is deducted
from its cash balance.
Firms have production capacities beyond which they
may not produce.
Distribution is deﬁned by product.
If there is a leftover inventory of products not sold by channels or B2B
exchange, then by default the inventory is liquidated.
Firms may invest in marketing, logistic support, and customer support to
enhance demand for their products.
Additional investments, such as
investment in infrastructure, lower the transaction costs.
Firms can engage in
two types of R&D—to increase perceived quality and to decrease the cost of
production in the next period.
For each investment, there is an obsolescence
variable introduced i.e., if the ﬁrm does not invest enough in comparison
with other ﬁrms, sales will be impacted.
4.2 Artiﬁcial agent behavior modeling1
Consumers make decisions in two steps.
First they decide which product
to buy and then they determine how much to buy.
A product is deﬁned
as a combination of attributes.
For simplicity, it was assumed that more
1
Details of the exact functional forms are available upon request.
What follows is a
highly condensed description.
36
A. R. Chaturvedi et al.
memory and hard drive go together and thus only two technical attributes
were considered—processor speed and memory/storage.
The third attribute was considered to be of quality or brand image—i.e., certain brands
were considered to be ‘‘premium’’ brands and consumers were assumed to
pay a premium for them.
The valuation attached by diﬀerent consumers
to each of these attributes varied by market segment.
In general, high-end
consumers value these attributes more than low-end consumers, therefore,
other things being equal, end up buying higher-end computers.
Consumer segments have various switching costs.