While each consumer
segment is attached to a particular ﬁrm, a particular channel, and a
particular market segment, (which is given by their behavior from the
previous period) they can switch upon payment of a switching cost measured in dollars.
There are separate switching cost for ﬁrms, channels, and
products.
Thus if a particular consumer segment bought computers of
brand x1, from channel y1, in market segment z1 in the previous period
but switched to brand x2 while keeping channels and market segments the
same, he would incur only a brand switching cost which would be added
to the price.
If he changed channels as well, the channel switching cost
would be added as well.
The consumers evaluate each product on oﬀer in the market based on
their valuations of attributes.
Then they compare the prices charged by
vendors and choose the one product that oﬀers the maximum surplus (value
minus price) based on their speciﬁc valuation taking into account the
switching costs as described above.
Once the product choice is made in this fashion, the quantity is determined by a system of Cobb-Douglas demand equations.
If there are n competing manufacturers selling diﬀerentiated goods, and
the quantity Q1 is sold by ﬁrm 1 at price P1 and the quantity Qn sold by ﬁrm
n at price Pn then the demand is assumed to be:
b
b
b
b
Q1 ¼ A1 P1Àa1 P2 2;1 P3 3;1 P4 4;1 . . .
Pn n;1
..
b
b
b
bnÀ1;n
Qn ¼ An PnÀan P1 1;n P2 2;n P3 3;n . . .
PnÀ1
where a is the own price elasticity of demand and b is the cross price
elasticity of demand.
In general, there should be a separate a for every
commodity and a separate b for every ordered pair of commodities, but
for simplicity in this exercise all a’s are taken to be equal as are all b’s.
Firms can invest in advertising.
The advertising level chosen by i ﬁrm
increases its demand by increasing its shift parameter Ai given above in
the Cobb-Douglas demand case.
It simultaneously causes the demand for
the other ﬁrms to drop but not by the full amount of the increase in
demand of the advertising ﬁrm.
In other words, if all ﬁrms increased
advertising simultaneously, total demand would increase, but some ﬁrms
could suﬀer a drop in demand on account of the relative eﬀects.
Similar
argument applies to other investments as well.
Computational experimentations in market
37
4.3 Conﬁguration and calibration
We used data from a variety of sources to populate our synthetic economy.
We used the reports by industry analysts, published articles, annual reports,
SEC ﬁlings, company websites, and other published materials.
For elasticity
of demand, a major PC manufacturer made available to us the basic marketing data on price responsiveness collected by it.
They also gave us data on
brand perception, switching costs, and valuation of attributes such as processor speed etc. Marginal cost of production for the various manufacturers
were inferred from prices and margin estimates published in the industry
press.
Once the data is gathered, economy was populated with 30,000 artiﬁcial
agents with 10,000 agents in each of the high, medium and low segments.
Their behaviors were calibrated and veriﬁed against a few known scenarios
to create the SEAS virtual execution environment.
Two small (12–15 participants) and two midsized (40–45 participants)
experiments were conducted to validate, verify, and calibrate the synthetic
environment.
Business executives participated in the small group experiments while MBA students participated in the midsized experiments.
The
purpose of these experiments was to assess the realism and reasonableness of
the synthetic environment as well as test the stability and performance of the
model.
Based on the recommendations and the results of these experiments,
the parameters were adjusted, algorithms were reﬁned, and the environment
was tuned for performance.
Also, these experiments gave insights into scalability of the SEAS environment.
4.4 Experiment and results
The main experiment was run with 180 students, divided into four parallel
sessions.
Each session had the full complement of manufacturers, channels,
and B2B exchanges.
The experiment comprised of several steps—some involved a facilitator and the others used computer-based simulation.
The ﬁrst
step involved ideas and insights generation.
In this step, participants brought
forth their own ideas, insights, and understanding of the issues facing the
companies they represented and the industry as a whole.
The second step
involved testing these ideas and insights against the industry structure pertaining to relative positions of ﬁrms on product mix, customer perception,
and infrastructure sophistication.
In addition to the structure, the ideas and
insights were also tested for robustness against economic, cultural, and
competitive uncertainties.
The fourth step involved the development of different options and business ideas.
The ﬁfth step involved testing the business
ideas in SEAS’ synthetic economy.
The sixth and ﬁnal step involved an afteraction review, in which participants discussed their moves, counter-moves,
and outcomes.
While the teams devised several strategies during the facilitated idea
generation session, the ﬁve most commonly used strategies for the manufacturing ﬁrms were:
38
A. R. Chaturvedi et al.
1.
2.
3.
4.
5.Stay a pure manufacturer.
Develop a symbiotic relationship with the channel.
Go direct aggressively with bundled services.
Subscribe to an existing B2B exchange.
Collaborate with other manufacturers and channel ﬁrm to create a new
B2B exchange.
The channel ﬁrms, likewise, identiﬁed the following ﬁve options to explore:
1.
2.
3.
4.
5.Just add value through service.
Develop a symbiotic relationship with the manufacturer.
Compete aggressively with the name brand ﬁrms through white-boxes.
Subscribe to an existing B2B exchange.
Collaborate with manufacturers and other channel ﬁrms to create a new
B2B exchange.
Experiments were run in two phases.
In the ﬁrst phase, OEMs’ had to
decide whether they were going to setup a ‘‘dot com’’ or not and the channels
had to react to those decisions.
In phase two of the experiment, a neutral
exchange was introduced as well as OEMs and channels were given the
ability to start their own exchanges.
The results of these experiments are
given below.
4.4.1 To dot com or not to dot com
Phase I of the experiment—‘‘to dot com or not to dot com’’ focuses more on
the relationship between the manufacturer and the channel partner.
When
PC manufacturers ﬁrst considered venturing into ‘‘going direct,’’ they did so
with much trepidation.
They did not want to roil the retailers on whom they
so intimately depended.
The retailers, carefully watching the rise in the
number of manufacturers going direct, kept the pressure on manufacturers
to restrict their eﬀorts to bypass their traditional sales channels.
The boxmakers (OEMs) quickly discovered one of the fundamental sources of
channel conﬂict—where they wanted to send fully loaded boxes while the
channel wanted ‘‘stripped down’’ versions of boxes.
The channels were quite
successful in playing oﬀ one manufacturer against the other.
As a result, the box-makers quickly discovered that the only way to move
fully loaded boxes was to go direct, (see next section).
This preference for
going direct was reinforced by the ﬁnding that the channels were increasingly
turning to the generics (white boxes) to supply them with low-end machines.
Manufacturers found going direct challenging, as they feared channel
ﬁrms could ﬁght back by concentrating on white boxes.
However, indecision
proved to be even worse.
Gradually many came to the realization that there
was no alternative.
Regardless of the diﬃculty of selling direct, manufacturers still found ways to sell direct to customers without oﬀending the
distribution channel, e.g.,
Computational experimentations in market
39
(a) Some manufactures negotiated with their channel partners to sell only
certain conﬁgurations direct and the rest through them.
Thus, the
channel partners did not ﬁnd them to be in direct competition.
(b) Successful manufacturers sold low base systems with low option load
through the traditional channel and sold high-end systems directly.
(c) Manufacturers who oﬀered a wide range of products through the
channel and made no investment in direct sales facility, very quickly lost
their bargaining power.
Without appropriate infrastructure to sell direct
and without a channel ﬁrm to sell their products, these manufacturers
ended up losing substantial market share, and lost their leverage with the
channel.
When they ﬁnally did decide to go direct, it was too little and
too late.
Their customers had left them and very few returned.
(d) Going direct with just hardware proved diﬃcult.
These ﬁrms did not gain
enough new customers to justify their move and lost the trust of the
channel to boot.
Manufacturers bundling services ended up with higher
proﬁt margins and market share.
White box play was key for channel ﬁrms.
As more manufacturers
resorted to direct selling, the channel ﬁrms came back aggressively with
white boxes and bundled them with service.
Power play for margins was
quite evident in the exercise.
Some manufacturing ﬁrms used ‘‘reward
power’’ to entice channels to cooperate.
In this power play, the manufacturing ﬁrm allowed the channel to take margins on low-end base systems while they went direct with the high-end conﬁgurations.
This
approach seemed to work in the short run and the channels’ bargaining
power gradually eroded.
Two channel ﬁrms were relegated to being rather
insigniﬁcant pure value-added resellers.
However, when the channel ﬁrm was aggressive with the right mix of
white boxes and branded products, it wielded signiﬁcant market power.
In
certain cases, it was even able to exert ‘‘coercive power’’ on the manufacturer, especially with those brands that found going a bit tough.
These
manufacturers had to agree to bigger share of the proﬁt on options in order
to sell their systems.
Figure 4 shows the proﬁts of the ﬁrms over time, one of
which, named D (representing Dell), managed to stem the trend toward
lower proﬁts by aggressively bundling services with hardware and attained
industry leadership.
4.4.2 To B2B or not to B2B
In phase II of the experiment, a ﬁctitious, neutral B2B exchange, PCex, was
introduced.
In a B2B exchange, multiple buyers and sellers come together to
trade.
PCex was set up as a vendor neutral exchange.
In other words, it had
no interest in success or failure of the participating members.
Every OEM
had the choice to subscribe to this exchange.
The key strategic issues that the
players had to consider were:
1.
Status quo.
2.
Sell all direct.
40
A. R. Chaturvedi et al.
120
100
% Profits
80
60
40
20
0
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9 10 11 12 13 14 15 16 17 18 19 20 21 22 23 24 25 26 27 28 29 30
Time
M1
M2
M3
M4
D
M1- M3 = Branded OEMs; M4 = Generic OEM; and D = Dell
Fig.
4 The proﬁts of the ﬁrms over time.
M1–M3 branded OEMS, M4 generic OEM,
D dell
3.
4.
5.
6.Sell high-valued products direct.
Sell commodity and surplus products through the exchange.
Sell direct to value-added resellers.
Go all out through B2B exchange.
B2B exchanges allowed a complex set of strategic alternatives to OEMs.
The choices were between three diﬀerent business models—traditional, direct, and through the exchange.
The evolutions of ﬁrms adopting diﬀerent business models were quite
interesting.
For example, initially, OEMs successfully segmented the market.
They sold commodity PCs through the exchange, used the direct model to
serve the high-value accounts with high-end systems, and used value-added
resellers to sell to small and midsized customers who had higher needs for
service.
PCEx that started as an exchange for surplus and commodity
product became a full-service vertical market.
This resulted in channel
companies becoming pure service providers.
Prices were lower, the margins
were higher with the exchanges as the transaction, and search costs for the
customers came down.
An interesting hybrid business model that worked
was to sign up customers on the exchange and then service them direct.
Once the B2B exchange acquired a critical mass, making proﬁts on a
neutral exchange became a real challenge for all manufacturers.
Given the
transparency of prices, and quantities, prices very quickly converged to the
marginal costs of the manufacturers.
It is quite evident from the Fig.
5 that
Computational experimentations in market
41
90
80
70
% Profit
60
50
40
30
20
10
0
1
2 3
4
5 6
7
8 9 10 11 12 13 14 15 16 17 18 19 20 21 22 23 24 25 26 27 28 29 30
Time
M1
M2
M3
M4
Fig.
5 Proﬁts of ﬁrms in a neutral exchange
intense competition between ﬁrms led to total erosion of proﬁts.
Artiﬁcial
agents adapted their behaviors to the actions of the manufacturers.
They
started to hold back their demand in anticipation of prices going down.
At
each price point, diﬀerent groups of agents bought computers.
This outcome
mirrors what happened in the real world as well.
Having multiple B2B exchanges in an industry was disastrous.
With four
exchanges (B2B1–B2B4), customers were confused and switched rapidly
between exchanges and between ﬁrms.
As a result of this churning, their
surplus was much lower, brand loyalty was greatly diminished, and the lack
of critical mass on each exchange resulted in poor liquidity for the exchanges.
At this point, the neutral exchange not only lacked loyalty among buyers,
but also lacked support from the sellers, as the branded manufacturers
created their own exchange.
Failing to sustain its business model, the neutral
exchange exited the space and the intermediary-oriented exchange reduced
its investment in the exchange and chose to become a niche player supporting ‘‘branded’’ surplus and white-boxes.
As shown in Fig.
6, all four
B2B Exchanges either lost money or barely broke even since at 20% or less
they did not cover ﬁxed costs.
B2B1 was a neutral exchange, B2B2 was a
seller-oriented exchange, B2B3 was a private exchange, and B2B4 was an
intermediary-oriented exchange.
Markets became very stable with two prominent exchanges.
The prominent ‘‘direct’’ seller continued to have high proﬁts and volumes with its own
exchange but the growth in its market share slowed down considerably because customers seeking best price migrated to the sellers’ exchange to lower
their search costs.
Proﬁt margins for branded products were quite high.
Each
42
A. R. Chaturvedi et al.
25
Gross Margins (%)
20
15
10
5
0
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9 10 11 12 13 14 15 16 17 18 19 20 21 22 23 24 25 26 27 28 29 30
Time
B2B1
B2B2
B2B3
B2B4
Cost
Fig.
6 Proﬁts of B2B exchanges
of these ﬁrms was able to maintain its positions quite well and was able to
segment its markets quite eﬀectively.
Two dominant and stable exchanges and an eﬃcient niche player (2+1
model) seemed to be the optimal solution as in Fig.
7.
In this case, the
customer surplus was quite high, the switching was low, and the search and
70
60
% Profit
50
40
30
20
10
0
1
2
3
4
6
5
Time
B2B2
Fig.
7 Sustainable 2+1 exchanges
B2B3
B2B4
7
8
Computational experimentations in market
43
transaction costs were quite low, but towards the end proﬁtability started to
erode here as well.
5 Conclusion
This paper describes an agent-based computational experimentation for
product and supply-chain co-design.
It considers the rationale behind the
research in the area of synthetic agents and their use in artiﬁcial economies.
Past research has shown how analysis of the behavior of artiﬁcial agents can
lead to valuable insights for businesses.
With the growth of the Internet and
artiﬁcial agents conducting business transactions therein, there is a need to
predict possible future scenarios through the use of such synthetic agents
interacting with human agents in artiﬁcial environments.
Rapid growth in
computing power and development of sophisticated software engineering
methods allow for such modeling.
Speciﬁcally, this paper builds a synthetic environment representing the
PC industry with brand name manufacturers as well as generic box makers,
channels, and business customers.
This environment combines simulation
with gaming by putting artiﬁcial agents and human agents in the same
environment.
As such, it combines techniques from two diﬀerent domains,
namely ABS and experimental economics.
This combination allows us to
capture depth of decision making as represented by human players, with
breadth of decision making, as represented by thousands of artiﬁcial agents.
The manufacturers and channels were played by human players while several
thousand artiﬁcial agents portrayed three segments of customers (small,
medium, and large).
PC makers were able to sell directly to consumers and to
also engage in value-enhancing investments along various dimensions.