Health Care Manage Sci (2007) 10:331–339
DOI 10.1007/s10729-007-9030-y
Simulation tools for developing policies for complex systems:
Modeling the health and safety of refugee communities
James Anderson & Alok Chaturvedi & Mike Cibulskis
Received: 5 February 2007 / Accepted: 11 July 2007 / Published online: 18 September 2007
# Springer Science + Business Media, LLC 2007
Abstract The U.S. Committee for Refugees and Immigrants estimated that there were over 33 million refugees
and internally displaced persons (IDPs) in the world at the
beginning of 2005.
IDP/Refugee communities behave in
complex ways making it difficult to make policy decisions
regarding the provision of humanitarian aid and health and
safety.
This paper reports the construction of an agent-based
model that has been used to study humanitarian assistance
policies executed by governments and NGOs that provide
for the health and safety of refugee communities.
Agentbased modeling (ABM) was chosen because the more
widely used alternatives impose unrealistic restrictions and
assumptions on the system being modeled and primarily
apply to aggregate data.
We created intelligent agents
representing institutions, organizations, individuals, infrastructure, and governments and analyzed the resulting
interactions and emergent behavior using a Central Composite Design of Experiments with five factors.
The
resulting model allows policy makers and analysts to create
scenarios, to make rapid changes in parameters, and
J. Anderson (*)
Department of Sociology & Anthropology,
Purdue University,
700 W. State Street,
West Lafayette, IN 47907-2059, USA
e-mail: andersonj@purdue.edu
A. Chaturvedi
Krannert School of Management,
403 W. State Street,
West Lafayette, IN 47907, USA
e-mail: alok@purdue.edu
M. Cibulskis
Simulex Inc.,
West Lafayette, IN, USA
e-mail: mcibulskis@simulexinc.com
provides a test bed for concepts and strategies.
Policies
can be examined to see how refugee communities might
respond to alternative courses of action and how these
actions are likely to affect the health and well-being of the
community.
Keywords Refugees . Agent-based modeling . Simulation .
Policy analysis
1 Background and objectives
The U.S. Committee for Refugees and Immigrants [1]
estimated that there were more than 33 million refugees and
internally displaced persons (IDPs) in the world at the
beginning of 2005.
Over two million of these refugees are
from Afghanistan alone.
The UN Refugee Agency [2]
budget as of July 1, 2005 was $1.35 billion.
According to
the World Refugee Survey, the United States and the
European Commission contributed more than $700 million
U.S. dollars annually to nongovernment organizations
(NGOs) for refugee aid worldwide in 2004.
Since the end of World War II, global conflicts have
generated an increasing number of refugees and IDPs,
resulting principally from conflicts within states.
An
analysis of events and conditions that have led to refugee
flows in the last quarter of the 20th century suggests that
the numbers of refugees per conflict have been increasing
and that certain regions of the world with countries
experiencing high levels of violence are producing the
majority of refugees and IDPs [3].
While during this period
the traditional countries that have accepted refugees have
increased the number of refugees accepted for resettlement,
there is increased domestic pressure within these receiving
countries to limit admissions of refugees [4].
At the same
332
time, the Institute of Development Studies has raised
questions as to whether refugees should be integrated into
the local population and relief programs should work
through local welfare agencies [5].
Policy responses to influxes of large numbers of refugees
and IDPs vary considerably from country to country [6].
The consequence of providing humanitarian aid to refugees
creates problems for the country receiving them.
Reports of
the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees to the
UN Economic and Social Council [7] and Amnesty
International [8] documented the fact that military and
armed attacks on refugee camps have increased.
Consequently, the report calls for international protection of
refugees especially women and girls, who constitute the
majority of the refugee population.
In addition to security, a
second major problem for refugee communities is the
provision of health care [9, 10].
Studies have found
Hepatitis B, malaria, and tuberculosis prevalent among
refugees to the U.S. and the U.K. [11].
Migrants to Spain
from sub-Saharan Africa were found to be carriers of
Hepatitis B [12].
Most refugee camps are located in areas afflicted with
factional wars, border disputes, and other crises making it
difficult to carry out effective humanitarian aid efforts.
IDP/
Refugee communities behave in complex ways making it
difficult to make policy decisions regarding the provision of
humanitarian aid and health and safety.
International,
national, institutional, organizational, and human factors
interact in dynamic ways making it difficult to predict the
outcomes of policy decisions [6].
Moreover, in situations
such as refugee communities, the system is neither directly
observable nor subject to unifying organizational theories.
Decisions involve a number of stake-holders with
conflicting values [13].
Currently there is a need to view
the refugee problem as a reoccurring phenomenon with
identifiable features rather than as individual historical
events [14].
One approach to modeling refugee communities is to use
computer-assisted reasoning in policy analysis [15].
Simulation can provide a way past some of the difficulties in
modeling these communities.
A simulation model represents a theory of how a particular system works.
The model
can be used to analyze the forces that are driving refugee
flows and conditions.
The impacts of government policies
can be examined and used to conduct policy experiments to
see how refugee communities might respond to alternative
courses of action.
By executing the computer model with
different initial values for its parameters and inputs, patterns
and regularities can be discerned from the results.
This paper describes an agent-based simulation model
that was developed to examine policy options regarding the
provision of humanitarian aid to refuge communities.
Agent-based modeling (ABM) was chosen because the
Health Care Manage Sci (2007) 10:331–339
more widely used alternatives that utilize systems of
differential equations, statistical decision theory, or operation
research methods impose unrealistic restrictions and assumptions on the system being modeled such as linearity,
homogeneity, and normality [16–18].
Also traditional models
apply primarily to aggregated data.
In the following sections we briefly describe the
rationale for choosing agent-based modeling to study
refugee communities.
This is followed by a description of
the model and the rules that govern individual agents’
behavior.
We next present the results of computational
experiments undertaken to better understand the effects of
policy decisions on the health and well-being of a refugee
community.
2 Methods
2.1 Agent-based modeling
Many social systems such as refugee communities are
inherently nonlinear.
That is the effects of independent
variables representing policy decisions on dependent
variables or outcomes are not proportional and directly
predictable.
Such nonlinear systems are difficult to model
because they cannot be understood analytically [19].
The
behavior of the system cannot be predicted from a set of
equations.
The only effective way of exploring the behavior
of nonlinear systems is by building and running simulation
models.
Two different approaches to modeling nonlinear
systems have been developed, system dynamics and agentbased modeling.
The two approaches, while quite different,
are complimentary.
System dynamics models are based on a
set of differential equations representing complex feedback
loops among aggregate state variables representing the
system.
The feedback structure is what makes a system
adapt over time [20, 21].
In contrast, agent-based modeling
examines the global consequences of interactions among
individual agents.
Properties of the system emerge from a
small set of rules governing interactions among agents [22].
Agent-based models are capable of modeling the
complexity of social systems because they utilize the rich
data and knowledge that are available about behaviors,
motivations, and relationships among social agents.
The
purpose of agent-based modeling is to determine the global
consequences of individual interactions in a given space.
Agents are viewed as generating emergent behavior by
interacting with one another according to a small set of
rules.
These interactions among agents give rise to the
system’s complex behavior.
The overall behavior of the
system of actors cannot be derived directly from the rules
governing individual behavior of actors.
Emergence then is
viewed as a property of complex systems [23].
Health Care Manage Sci (2007) 10:331–339
We chose to use agent-based modeling of refugee
communities because it overcomes one of the major
difficulties associated with policy analysis at this level,
namely the scarcity of comparable and generalizable
models of these communities.
An agent-based synthetic
environment allows us to generate an understanding of the
collective behavior of refugees and IDPs through computational experimentation.
This form of modeling provides
insights into how macro level phenomenon emerges and
attains equilibrium and stability over time from micro level
behavior.
In summary, agent-based simulation allows: (1)
virtual simulation of the consequences of decisions, (2)
integration of multiple theories regarding the phenomenon
under investigation, (3) representation of agents with
multiple decision strategies, and (4) modeling of heterogeneous actors who can modify their behavior over time [24].
The research process involves modifying the rules, the
environmental parameters, and/or the decision parameters,
and analyzing the resulting outcomes regarding the emergent behavior of the overall system.
The purpose of the
analysis is to determine leverage points in complex systems
on which to base policy decisions [25, 26].
Systems Theory provides a theory of modeling that can
be used for systems that are neither directly observable nor
subject to a unifying organizational principle.
A system is
defined as a collection of interacting objects assumed to
have multiple modes of responding based on the observed
input–output relations over time.
As long as the system is
nearly decomposable, variables that move together over
time can be aggregated statistically [25].
The types of objects that can influence the health and
well-being of a refugee community system are refugees and
IDPs; government, nongovernment, and social organizations that provide humanitarian aid; medical centers; and
hospitals.
Inputs to the system include numerous aiding
actions by multiple organizations that affect the availability
of food and water, medical supplies, and medical personnel
as well as levels of security and sanitation.
Within the
refugee community system, classes of outputs include the
number of refugees who are sick, dead, or healthy.
2.2 Model description
A number of platforms and methods exist that can be used
for agent-based modeling [27].
For this study we used the
Synthetic Environment for Analysis (SEAS)—computational
experimentation environment [28].
This platform provides an
environment that can be used to construct a virtual model of
a refugee camp.
The SEAS software has been used to create
a small-scale artificial society which includes the health care
system of a refugee community.
This model is one of several used in concert within the
synthetic environment to conduct computational experi-
333
ments in order to explore the effects of policy decisions
regarding the provision of humanitarian aid, health and
safety for refugees The model is based on several social
science theories, namely certain fundamental or experimentally developed theories are explicitly encoded in the
agents, for example., well-being [29, 30], set point theories
from psychology [31], and production and consumption
theories from micro economics.
In the next section, agent’s
attributes are described as well as the inputs to and outputs
of the model.
2.2.1 Agent specification
Individual refugees are constructed as a proportional
representation of the social makeup of a refugee camp.
Each individual agent consists of a set of static and
dynamic traits.
For example, there are three “income”
classes for IDP/Refugees: Elite, Middle, and Weak.
These
designations correspond to the agent’s Basic Needs level of
low/medium/high and affect an agent’s likelihood of
becoming sick.
Other traits modeled in each refugee agent
include religion, ethnicity, social networks, and ideology.
Dynamic traits include the refugee’s subjective wellbeing and health status.
The refugee agent’s subjective
well-being is based on the work of Kahneman [30].
The
agent’s well-being consists of eight needs: basic, political,
financial, security, religious, educational, health, and
freedom of movement.
A refugee agent’s behavior is
primarily driven by his/her traits and well-being.
Information reaches the agent via traditional media sources and
rumors spread by other agents.
Initially each agent’s desire of each need is based on the
socioeconomic class of the citizen.
Further, we also identify
weights that identify the relative importance of the
fulfillment of each need to the citizen.
Each citizen forms
a perception of the level of fulfillment of each need from
several information sources such as social groups, leaders,
organizations, and media.
Each agent then identifies
deprivation of each need as the gap between the perception
of a need and his/her desires for the need.
By weighting the
deprivation of each need, each citizen identifies their
overall deprivation.
Citizens adjust their weights as certain needs become
more significant due to conditions in the environment.
Citizens focus on needs that they are most deprived of and
attach less significance to those needs that are fulfilled.
Organizations, Leaders, and Media can influence a citizen
into adjusting weights by attaching significance to certain
issues.
Citizens are also influenced or coerced by their social
groups in the needs to which they attach most significance.
The leader agent is encoded with influence levels that
reflect his/her power within the group, organization, or
institution.
A leader agent is categorized as social, religious,
334
Health Care Manage Sci (2007) 10:331–339
and/or political and has a repertoire that is larger than that
of citizen agents and includes additional traits such as
power base, ideology, and his/her stance on economic,
political, and social policies.
These agents are able to affect
the political and social climate of the synthetic environment
and impose their stances upon citizens and organizations to
promote their respective goals.
The goal of leader agents is
to set the agenda of the organization or institution in which
they reside and persuade the citizen/member agents to make
decisions that favor those positions.
An organization is comprised of a structured group of
artificial human citizen and leader agents.
Citizens that
subscribe to an organization make up the member population, and the combined behaviors and interactions of
members and leaders results in the behavior for the
organization.
Organizational leadership constantly seeks
maintenance and growth of the organizational membership
by providing tangible and intangible benefits, and citizens
subscribe based on a perceived level of benefit that is
received from the organization.
Leaders attempt to influence
the organization to align with their ideologies by framing
issues and attitude sharing.
Members also influence each
other’s attitudes through the formation of intra-group social
networks that emerge from levels of affinity between
members.
Additionally, through inter-organization networks,
attitudes and resources may be shared between organizations.
Fig.
1 Interactions among
agents
Through these internal and external interactions, organizations cause significant changes in perception and attitude and
become core protagonists of activism in the model.
Within our model media also plays a significant role in
providing information to members in the form of reports on
well-being and attitudes.
Media organizations consist of
television, radio, newspapers, and magazines.
They make
choices about what information to cover, who to cover,
what statements to report, what story elements to emphasize, and how to report it.
Media is able to set the agenda
for domestic policies as well as foreign policy issues.
Incidents are framed on well-being components and
formalized in a media report.
We model institutions as ‘governmental entities’ such as
the army, police, legislature, courts, executive, bureaucracy,
and political parties—entities that are able to formulate
policies that have legal binding and have more discretionary resources.
We also consider institutions as structures
that are products of individual choices or preferences, the
later in turn being constrained by the institutional structures
(i.e., an interactive process).
The Government Institution
agents represent the leadership and various branches of the
government.
Institutions are like formal organizations with
an additional power to influence the behaviors of members
and nonmembers.
Figure 1 shows the interactions among
the agents.
Engage
Give Aid
Interdict
Media Campaign
Provide Goods
Threaten
Network
Give Aid
Collaborate
Consensus
Status
Rebels
Riot
Attack
Demonstrate
Government
Institutions
Org
Infrastructure
Give Aid
Provide Goods Request
Interdict
Provide Goods
Give Aid
Collaborate
Consensus
Organizations
Join
Leave
Change
Stay
Media Report
Adjust
Perception
Give Goods
Give Benefits
Coerce
Unify
Provoke
Support
Citizens
Leaders
Health Care Manage Sci (2007) 10:331–339
2.2.2 Sickness model
Refugees can be in one of four states Healthy, Sick Outside
the Medical Center, Sick Inside the Medical Center, and
Dead.
Refugees will remain in a state for a minimum of one
time step, representing one hour, after entering.
Each time
step, every agent checks to see if they remain in their
current state or transition to another state.
State: Healthy This is the default state for agents.
Agents
remain in this state until they become sick and transition to
Sick Outside.
The probability that an agent will become
sick is a nonlinear function, f(Basic Needs, Food_Water,
Sanitation), of the refugees current perceived Basic Needs
level, the community sanitations level, and the community
Food/Water level.
335
Medical Resources, Medical Personnel, security), a nonlinear function of a number from a triangular distribution, the
community Medical Resources level, the community
Medical Personnel level, and the community Security level.
Each time step, an agent checks to see whether they have
died in the medical center.
The probability of dying in the
Medical Center is p=0.0001 per time step and is an
important model parameter for calibration.
If they have
not died, they check to see if sufficient time has elapsed that
they have become healthy and can transition to the Healthy
state.
State: Dead Once an agent dies, they are removed from the
camp and undergo no further processing.
State: Sick Outside the Medical Center When an agent
becomes sick, they enter this state and are assigned a
number, Δd , from a triangular distribution that represents
the number of time steps in which they will die if they are
unable to enter the medical center.
Each time step, the agent
checks to see if they have died as a result of their inability
to obtain medical attention.
If they are still alive, they will
attempt to enter the medical center and transition to the Sick
Inside state.
If the medical center has exceeded its capacity,
the agent is forced to remain in the Sick Outside state.
2.2.3 Inputs
State: Sick Inside the Medical Center When an agent enters
the medical center, they are assigned a number that
represents the number of time steps in which they will
become well again and transition to the Healthy state.
The
number of time steps until they become healthy is f(Δh,
The outputs of the model include the numbers of healthy,
ill, and dead refugees.
Also the number of ill refugees being
treated by the clinic/hospital is calculated.
Figure 2 shows
the virtual model of the refugee camp and its health care
system.
Fig.
2 Virtual health care system for a refugee camp
Policy decisions and actions by governments and NGOs
provide the inputs to the model.
Levels of Security, Food
and Water, Medical Personnel, Medical Resources, and
Sanitation can take on values ranging from 1 to 10.
The
capacity of the medical clinic/hospital is established prior to
a simulation run.
2.2.4 Outputs
336
Health Care Manage Sci (2007) 10:331–339
2.3 Model evaluation
3 Results
The internal validity, sensitivity, and outcome validity of
the model have been evaluated [32, 33].
First, the internal
validity of the model was assessed by verifying that its data,
variables, and parameters are based on experimentally
developed theories such as well-being [29, 30] and data
from the UN Refugee Agency.
Second, a sensitivity analysis was performed on the
model.
For each of the independent input variables (i.e.,
Food and Water, Sanitation Level, Medical Resources,
Medical personnel, and Security level), the model was used
to predict outcome variables such as the number of refugees
who are sick or who are alive over time.
Twenty-eight runs
were performed with different combinations of the five
input variables.
A neural network analysis was performed
to estimate parameters of a model that can be used to
predict outcomes.
In order to test the sensitivity and stability of the model,
levels of food and water were varied while the other four
parameters were held constant at their midpoints.
As
predicted, at low levels of food and water, fewer refugees
were alive after 50 h. Moreover outcomes for each level of
food and water stabilize after 50 h. Additional runs were
performed for each of the other four input variables.
As
predicted, sickness rates declined as levels of sanitation,
medical resources, medical personnel, and security
increased.
Also, treatment times or length of stay in the
medical center decreased as levels of medical resources and
medical personnel increased.
Outcome validity was also assessed.
While limited
historical data are available to verify the model,
predictions from the agent-based model were compared
with the predictions from a system dynamics model [20,
21].
Over time, predictions of the number of sick refuges,
refugees in the medical center, and deaths compare closely
to the predictions from the agent-based model presented
here.
A design of experiment was conducted to capture the
underlying relationships in the simulation.
A Central
Composite Design (CCD) with five factors and three levels
was created and analyzed by DOE PRO XL software.
The
factors were (1) Basic Needs, (2) Food & Water, (3)
Sanitation, (4) Medical Resources, and (5) Security.
For this
experiment the levels of these factors were set by the
experimenters, but when the synthetic environment is used
for supporting policy analysis events, the levels are
modified by autonomous policy-making agents like governments and NGOs.
DOE PRO XL produced two regression equations, one for
predicting the percentage sick and one for predicting the
percentage of the initial camp population alive at any point in
time.
The error rates in prediction were larger than expected so
the alternative method of using neural networks for function
approximation was applied.
Using an add-on package for
Mathematica®, better performing predicting equations were
derived and used for creating response surfaces.
The effects of the level of food and water available to
refugees and medical resources available to refugees are
shown in Fig.
3.
The sickness rate declines with increased
food and water and the availability of greater medical
resources in the refugee camp.
The largest decline in illness
occurs when both factors are at higher levels.
Errors in
prediction appear to be distributed uniformly over the input
space.
Figure 4 shows the effects of low levels of food and
water and sanitation on the number of sick refugees.
For
this run the capacity of the medical center was fixed at 45.
The simulation run indicates that the number of sick
refugees rapidly exceeds the capacity of the medical center
to treat them.
The rapidity with which the number of ill
refugees overwhelms the health care system in this case
suggests the importance of surveillance systems for early
detection of epidemics in refugee camps [34].
Fig.
3 Effects of levels of food
and water and medical resources
on the percent of refugees who
were sick after 15 days
Health Care Manage Sci (2007) 10:331–339
337
Fig.
4 The effect of low levels
of food and water and sanitation
on the number of sick refugees
over 4 days.
Capacity of the
medical center equals 45
The interactions between Food and Water, Sanitation,
Security, and Medical Resources and their effects upon
mortality among the refugee population can be seen in
Figs.
5 and 6.
For Fig.
5, Basic Needs, Medical Resources,
and Food and Water were fixed at medium levels.
The
results show that decreased Security results in increased
morbidity regardless of the level of Sanitation.
The worst
conditions occur when both Sanitation and Security levels
are at minimum levels.
The results show that low levels of
food and water result in a high number of sick refugees.
The levels of food and water appears to interact with the
level of security when both food and water supplies and
security are low, there is a sharp increase in the proportion
of sick refugees living in the camp.
For Fig.
6, Basic Needs, Sanitation, and Security were
fixed at medium levels Increases in both Food and Water
and Medical Resources have their greatest impact when
initial levels are at minimum values.
In other words, the
lifesaving effects of these two variables diminish as their
values increase.
These results represent a situation where
the supply of food, water, medical resources, sanitation, and
security by either a government or NGO are limited.
Figure 7 shows the effects of levels of sanitation and
medical resources on the percentage of refugees who are
sick after 15 days assuming that no new refugees enter the
camp during this two week period.
When sanitation and
medical resources are very low, the number of surviving
sick persons in the camp falls.
This is due to the increased
number of deaths that result from poor sanitation and
limited medical resources.
As the number of sick refugees
increases, the medical center reaches capacity and an
increasing number of refugees do not receive needed care
and eventually die.
Fig.
5 Effects of levels of sanitation and security on the number of
sick refugees after 10 days
Fig.
6 Effects of levels of food and water and medical resources on
the percent of refugees remaining alive after 15 days
338
Fig.
7 Effects of levels of sanitation and medical resources on the
percent of refugees who are sick after 15 days
4 Discussion
This paper reports the construction of an agent based model
that has been used to study humanitarian assistance policies
executed by governments and NGOs in a synthetic
environment.
We have created intelligent agents representing individuals, institutions, organizations, infrastructure,
and governments and analyzed the resulting interactions
and emergent behavior.
A major strength of the model is
that it allows policy makers to incorporate specific
characteristics of refugees and the governmental and
nongovernmental organizations that are providing humanitarian aid to the camp.
For example the simulation demonstrates the critical role
of security in providing for the health and well-being of
refugees.
The importance of security was highlighted in the
recommendations that Amnesty International made regarding the African Union Mission in Sudan (AMIS) [8].
The
report states that AMIS lacked the manpower and resources
to adequately protect the refugee population.
As a result
refugees were attacked and killed when they sought food,
water, and firewood.
Since the factors studied here are likely to be targeted by
policy makers in governments, NGOs, and relief organizations, this agent based model can be used to explore
alternative policies that may affect the health and well being
of refugees and displaced persons resulting from civil
unrest, wars, and natural disasters like hurricane Katrina.
These factors are likely to be targeted by policy makers in
governments and NGOs.
The limitations to the simulation described here are both
the unavailability of theories from which to create models
and data from which to calibrate model parameters.
These
same limitations make it even more difficult to utilize other
modeling techniques that impose restrictive assumptions.